10-k
d187868d10k.htm
10-k
10-k
table of contents
united states
securities and exchange commission  washington, d.c. 20549
form 10-k
x
annual report pursuant to section 13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934
for the fiscal year ended june 30, 2016  or
transition report pursuant to section 13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934
for the transition period from
to   commission file number
001-37845
microsoft corporation
washington
91-1144442
(state of incorporation)
(i.r.s. id)
one microsoft way, redmond, washington 98052-6399
(425) 882-8080
www.microsoft.com/investor
securities registered pursuant to section12(b) of the act:  common stock, $0.00000625 par value per share
nasdaq
securities registered pursuant to section12(g) of the act:
none  indicate by check mark
if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in rule 405 of the securities act.yesxno
indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to section13 or section15(d) of the exchange
act.yesno x  indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1) has filed all reports required to be filed by section13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934 during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter
period that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2) has been subject to such filing requirements for the past 90 days.yesxno  indicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically and posted on its
corporate website, if any, every interactive data file required to be submitted and posted pursuant to rule 405 of regulation s-t (232.405 of this chapter) during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was
required to submit and post such
files).yesxno   indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to item405 of regulation s-k (229.405 of this chapter) is not contained herein, and will not be contained, to the best of
registrants knowledge, in definitive proxy or information statements incorporated by reference in part iii of this form 10-k or any amendment to this form 10-k.  indicate by check mark whether the
registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer, or a smaller reporting company. see the definitions of large accelerated filer, accelerated filer and smaller reporting
company in rule 12b-2 of the exchange act.
largeacceleratedfiler
x
acceleratedfiler
non-accelerated filer
(do not check if a
smaller reporting company)
smallerreportingcompany
indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in rule 12b-2 of the exchange
act).yesno x  as of december31, 2015, the aggregate market value of the registrants common stock held by non-affiliates of the registrant was $424.5 billion based on the closing sale price as reported on the nasdaq
national market system. as of july25, 2016, there were 7,792,515,573 shares of common stock outstanding.  documents incorporated
by reference  portions of the definitive proxy statement to be delivered to shareholders in connection with the annual meeting of
shareholders to be held on november30, 2016 are incorporated by reference into part iii.
table of contents
microsoft corporation
form 10-k  for the fiscal
year ended june30, 2016  index
page
parti
item1.
business
executive officers of the registrant
item1a.
risk factors
item1b.
unresolved staff comments
item2.
properties
item3.
legal proceedings
item 4.
mine safety disclosures
partii
item5.
market for registrants common equity, related stockholder matters, and issuer purchases of equity securities
item6.
selected financial data
item7.
managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations
item7a.
quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk
item8.
financial statements and supplementary data
item9.
changes in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and financial disclosure
item9a.
controls and procedures
report of management on internal control over financial reporting
report of independent registered public accounting firm
item9b.
other information
partiii
item10.
directors, executive officers and corporate governance
item11.
executive compensation
item12.
security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management and related stockholder matters
item13.
certain relationships and related transactions, and director independence
item14.
principal accounting fees and services
partiv
item15.
exhibits, financial statement schedules
signatures
table of contents
part i  item 1
note about forward-looking statements
this report includes estimates, projections, statements relating to our business plans, objectives, and expected operating results that are
forward-looking statements within the meaning of the private securities litigation reform act of 1995, section27a of the securities act of 1933, and section21e of the securities exchange act of 1934. forward-looking
statements may appear throughout this report, including the following sections: business, managements discussion and analysis, and risk factors. these forward-looking statements generally are identified by
the words believe, project, expect, anticipate, estimate, intend, strategy, future, opportunity, plan, may,
should, will, would, will be, will continue, will likely result, and similar expressions. forward-looking statements are based on current expectations and assumptions that are
subject to risks and uncertainties that may cause actual results to differ materially. we describe risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results and events to differ materially in risk factors (part i, item1a of this form
10-k), quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk (part ii, item7a of this form 10-k), and managements discussion and analysis (part ii, item7 of this form 10-k). we undertake no obligation
to update or revise publicly any forward-looking statements, whether because of new information, future events, or otherwise.  part i
item1. business  general  our vision  microsoft is a technology company whose mission is to empower every person and every organization on the planet to achieve more. our strategy is to build best-in-class platforms and productivity services for a
mobile-first, cloud-first world.  the mobile-first, cloud-first world is transforming the way individuals and organizations use and
interact with technology. mobility is not focused on any one device; it is centered on the mobility of experiences that, in turn, are orchestrated by the cloud. cloud computing and storage solutions provide people and enterprises with various
capabilities to store and process their data in third-party datacenters. mobility encompasses the rich collection of data, applications, and services that accompany our customers as they move from setting to setting in their lives. we are
transforming our businesses to enable microsoft to lead the direction of this digital transformation, and enable our customers and partners to thrive in this evolving world.  what we offer  founded in 1975, we operate worldwide in over 190 countries. we develop,
license, and support a wide range of software products, services, and devices that deliver new opportunities, greater convenience, and enhanced value to peoples lives.  our products include operating systems; cross-device productivity applications; server applications; business solution applications; desktop and server management tools; software development tools; video games; and
training and certification of computer system integrators and developers. we also design, manufacture, and sell devices, including pcs, tablets, gaming and entertainment consoles, phones, other intelligent devices, and related accessories, that
integrate with our cloud-based offerings. we offer an array of services, including cloud-based solutions that provide customers with software, services, platforms, and content, and we provide solution support and consulting services. we also deliver
relevant online advertising to a global audience.  the ambitions that drive us
to carry out our strategy, our research and development efforts focus on three interconnected ambitions:
reinvent productivity and business processes.
table of contents
part i  item 1
build the intelligent cloud platform.
create more personal computing.
reinvent productivity and business processes
we believe we can significantly enhance the lives of our customers using our broad portfolio of productivity, communication, and information
services that span devices and platforms. productivity will be the first and foremost objective, to enable people to meet and collaborate more easily, and to effectively express ideas in new ways. we invent new scenarios that in turn create
opportunity for our partners and help businesses accelerate their transformation while respecting each persons privacy choices. the foundation for these efforts will rest on advancing our leading productivity, collaboration, communication, and
business process tools including word, excel, powerpoint, outlook, onenote, onedrive, skype, and microsoft dynamics (dynamics). with office 365, we provide these familiar industry-leading productivity and business process tools as cloud
services, enabling access from anywhere and any device.this creates an opportunity to reach new customers and expand the usage of our services by our existing customers. we see opportunity in combining our offerings in new ways that are
mobile, collaborative, intelligent and trustworthy. we offer our services across platforms and devices outside our own. as people move from device to device, so will their content and the richness of their services. we engineer our applications so
users can find, try, and buy them in friction-free ways.  build the intelligent cloud platform
in deploying technology that advances business strategy, enterprises decide what solutions will make employees more productive, collaborative, and
satisfied, and connect with customers in new and compelling ways. they work to unlock business insights from a world of data. to achieve these objectives, increasingly businesses look to leverage the benefits of the cloud. helping businesses move to
the cloud is one of our largest opportunities, and we believe we work from a position of strength. microsoft is one of two leaders in the market.  the shift to the cloud is driven by three important economies of scale: larger datacenters can deploy computational resources at significantly lower cost per unit than smaller ones; larger datacenters can
coordinate and aggregate diverse customer, geographic, and application demand patterns, improving the utilization of computing, storage, and network resources; and multi-tenancy lowers application maintenance labor costs for large public clouds. as
one of the largest providers of cloud computing at scale, we are well-positioned to help businesses move to the cloud and focus on innovation while leaving non-differentiating activities to reliable and cost-effective providers like microsoft.
we believe our server products and cloud services, which include microsoft sql server (sql server), windows server, visual
studio, system center, and microsoft azure (azure), make us the only company with a public, private, and hybrid cloud platform that can power modern business. with azure, we are one of very few cloud vendors that run at a scale that
meets the needs of businesses of all sizes and complexities. we are working to enhance the return on it investment by enabling enterprises to combine their existing datacenters and our public cloud into a single cohesive infrastructure. businesses
can deploy applications in their own datacenter, a partners datacenter, or in our datacenters with common security, management, and administration across all environments, with the flexibility and scale they want.
we enable organizations to securely adopt software-as-a-service applications, both our own and third-party, and integrate them with their existing
security and management infrastructure. we continue to innovate with higher-level services including identity and directory services that manage employee corporate identity and manage and secure corporate information accessed and stored across a
growing number of devices, rich data storage and analytics services, machine learning services, media services, web and mobile backend services, and developer productivity services. to foster a rich developer ecosystem, our platform is extensible,
enabling customers and partners to further customize and enhance our solutions, achieving even more value. this strategy requires continuing investment in datacenters and other infrastructure to support our services.
table of contents
part i  item 1
create more personal computing  we strive to make computing more personal by putting users at the core of the experience, enabling them to interact with technology in more intuitive, engaging, and dynamic ways. a computing device should be not
just a tool, but a partner. windows10 is the cornerstone of our ambition to usher in this era of more personal computing. we consider the launch of windows 10 in july 2015 to be a transformative moment as we moved from an operating system that
runs on a pc to a service that can power the full spectrum of devices. we developed windows 10 not only to be familiar to our users, but more safe, secure, and always up-to-date. windows 10 is more personal and productive with functionality such as
cortana, windows hello, windows ink, microsoft edge, and universal applications. windows 10 is designed to foster innovation  from us, our partners, and developers  through rich and consistent experiences across the range of existing
devices and entirely new device categories.  our ambition for windows 10 is to broaden our economic opportunity through three key
levers: an original equipment manufacturer (oem) ecosystem that creates exciting new hardware designs for windows 10; our own commitment to the health and profitability of our first-party premium device portfolio; and monetization
opportunities such as services, subscriptions, gaming, and search advertising. our oem partners are investing in an extensive portfolio of hardware designs and configurations for windows 10. we now have the widest range of windows hardware ever
available.  with the unified windows operating system, developers and oems can contribute to a thriving windows ecosystem. we invest
heavily to make windows the most secure, manageable, and capable operating system for the needs of a modern workforce. we are working to create a broad developer opportunity by unifying the installed base to windows 10 through upgrades and ongoing
updates, and by enabling universal windows applications to run across all device targets. as part of our strategic objectives, we are committed to designing and marketing first-party devices to help drive innovation, create new categories, and
stimulate demand in the windows ecosystem. we are developing new input/output methods within windows 10, including speech, pen, gesture, and augmented reality holograms to power more personal computing experiences.
our future opportunity  there are several
distinct areas of technology that we aim to drive forward. our goal is to lead the industry in these areas over the long-term, which we expect will translate to sustained growth. we are investing significant resources in:
delivering new productivity and business processes to improve how people communicate, collaborate, learn, work, play, and interact with one another.
building and running cloud-based services in ways that unleash new experiences and opportunities for businesses and individuals.
establishing the windows platform across servers and devices, both our own and third-party, and the cloud to drive a thriving ecosystem of developers, unify
the cross-device user experience, and increase agility when bringing new advances to market.
developing new devices that have increasingly natural ways to interact with them, including speech, pen, gesture, and augmented reality holograms.
applying machine learning to make technology more intuitive and able to act on our behalf to understand and interpret our needs using natural methods of
communication.  we believe the breadth of our products and services portfolio, our large global partner and customer
base, our growing ecosystem, and our ongoing investment in innovation position us to be a leader in these areas and differentiate ourselves from competitors.
table of contents
part i  item 1
operating segments  our segments provide management with a comprehensive financial view of our key businesses. the segments enable the alignment of strategies and objectives across the development, sales, marketing, and services
organizations, and they provide a framework for timely and rational allocation of resources within businesses.  in june 2015, we
announced a change in organizational structure to align to our strategic direction as a productivity and platform company. during the first quarter of fiscal year 2016, our chief operating decision maker, who is also our chief executive officer,
requested changes in the information that he regularly reviews for purposes of allocating resources and assessing performance. as a result, beginning in fiscal year 2016, we report our financial performance based on our new segments, productivity
and business processes, intelligent cloud, and more personal computing.  additional information on our operating segments and geographic
and product information is contained in note21segment information and geographic data of the notes to financial statements (part ii, item8 of this form 10-k).
our reportable segments are described below.
productivity and business processes  our
productivity and business processes segment consists of products and services in our portfolio of productivity, communication, and information services, spanning a variety of devices and platforms. this segment primarily comprises:
office commercial, including volume licensing and subscriptions to office 365 commercial for products and services such as office, exchange, sharepoint, and
skype for business, and related client access licenses (cals).
office consumer, including office sold through retail or through an office 365 consumer subscription, and office consumer services, including skype,
outlook.com, and onedrive.
dynamics business solutions, including dynamics erp products, dynamics crm on-premises, and dynamics crm online.
office commercial  office commercial is
designed to increase personal, team, and organizational productivity through a range of products and services. growth depends on our ability to reach new users, add value to our core product set, and continue to expand our product and service
offerings into new markets such as security, analytics, collaboration, unified communications, and business intelligence. office commercial revenue is mainly affected by a combination of the demand from commercial customers for volume licensing and
software assurance and the number of information workers in an enterprise, as well as the continued shift to office 365. office 365 is our cloud-based service that provides access to office plus other productivity services. cals provide access
rights to certain office commercial products and services, including exchange, sharepoint, and skype for business, and revenue is reported along with the associated office products and services.
office consumer  office consumer is
designed to increase personal productivity through a range of products and services. growth depends on our ability to reach new users, add value to our core product set, and continue to expand our product and service offerings into new markets.
office consumer revenue is mainly affected by the combination of customers that buy office with their new devices and the continued shift to office 365. office consumer services revenue is mainly affected by the demand for communication and storage
through skype, outlook.com, and onedrive, which is largely driven by subscriptions, advertising, and the sale of minutes. skype is designed to connect friends, family, clients, and colleagues through a variety of devices.
table of contents
part i  item 1
dynamics  dynamics provides business solutions for financial management, customer relationship management (crm), supply chain management, and analytics applications for small and mid-size businesses, large
organizations, and divisions of global enterprises. dynamics revenue is largely driven by the number of information workers licensed.  competition
competitors to office include software and global application vendors such as adobe systems, apple, cisco systems, facebook,
google, ibm, oracle, sap, and numerous web-based and mobile application competitors as well as local application developers in asia and europe. cisco systems is using its position in enterprise communications equipment to grow its unified
communications business. google provides a hosted messaging and productivity suite. apple distributes versions of its pre-installed application software, such as email, note-taking, and calendar products, through its pcs, tablets, and phones. skype
for business and skype also compete with a variety of instant messaging, voice, and video communication providers, ranging from start-ups to established enterprises. web-based offerings competing with individual applications have also positioned
themselves as alternatives to our products. we believe our products compete effectively based on our strategy of providing powerful, flexible, secure, and easy-to-use solutions that work well with technologies our customers already have and are
available on a device or via the cloud.  our dynamics products compete with vendors such as oracle and sap in the market for large
organizations and divisions of global enterprises. in the market focused on providing solutions for small and mid-sized businesses, our dynamics products compete with vendors such as infor, the sage group, and netsuite.salesforce.coms
cloud crm offerings compete directly with our dynamics crm on-premises and crm online offerings.  intelligent cloud
our intelligent cloud segment consists of our public, private, and hybrid server products and cloud services that can power modern business. this
segment primarily comprises:
server products and cloud services, including sql server, windows server, visual studio, system center, and related cals, as well as azure.
enterprise services, including premier support services and microsoft consulting services.
server products and cloud services  our
server products are designed to make it professionals, developers, and their systems more productive and efficient. server software is integrated server infrastructure and middleware designed to support software applications built on the windows
server operating system. this includes the server platform, database, business intelligence, storage, management and operations, virtualization, service-oriented architecture platform, security, and identity software. we also license standalone and
software development lifecycle tools for software architects, developers, testers, and project managers. server products and cloud services revenue is mainly affected by purchases through volume licensing programs, licenses sold to oems, and retail
packaged products. cals provide access rights to certain server products, including sql server and windows server, and revenue is reported along with the associated server product.
azure is a scalable cloud platform with computing, networking, storage, database, and management, along with advanced services such as analytics,
and comprehensive solutions such as enterprise mobility suite. azure includes a flexible platform that helps developers build, deploy, and manage enterprise, mobile, web, and internet of things applications, for any platform or device without having
to worry about the underlying infrastructure. azure enables customers to devote more resources to development and use of applications that benefit their organizations, rather than managing on-premises hardware and software.
table of contents
part i  item 1
enterprise services  enterprise services, including premier support services and microsoft consulting services, assist customers in developing, deploying, and managing microsoft server and desktop solutions and provide training and
certification to developers and it professionals on various microsoft products.  competition
our server products face competition from a wide variety of server operating systems and applications offered by companies with a range of market
approaches. vertically integrated computer manufacturers such as hewlett-packard, ibm, and oracle offer their own versions of the unix operating system preinstalled on server hardware. nearly all computer manufacturers offer server hardware for the
linux operating system and many contribute to linux operating system development. the competitive position of linux has also benefited from the large number of compatible applications now produced by many commercial and non-commercial software
developers. a number of companies, such as red hat, supply versions of linux.  we compete to provide enterprise-wide computing solutions
and point solutions with numerous commercial software vendors that offer solutions and middleware technology platforms, software applications for connectivity (both internet and intranet), security, hosting, database, and e-business servers. ibm and
oracle lead a group of companies focused on the java platform enterprise edition that competes with our enterprise-wide computing solutions. commercial competitors for our server applications for pc-based distributed client/server environments
include ca technologies, ibm, and oracle. our web application platform software competes with open source software such as apache, linux, mysql, and php. in middleware, we compete against java vendors.
our database, business intelligence, and data warehousing solutions offerings compete with products from ibm, oracle, sap, and other companies. our
system management solutions compete with server management and server virtualization platform providers, such as bmc, ca technologies, hewlett-packard, ibm, and vmware. our products for software developers compete against offerings from adobe, ibm,
oracle, other companies, and open-source projects, including eclipse (sponsored by ca technologies, ibm, oracle, and sap), php, and ruby on rails, among others.  we believe our server products provide customers with advantages in performance, total costs of ownership, and productivity by delivering superior applications, development tools, compatibility with a broad base of
hardware and software applications, security, and manageability.  azure faces diverse competition from companies such as amazon, google,
ibm, oracle, salesforce.com, vmware, and open source offerings. azures competitive advantage includes enabling a hybrid cloud, allowing deployment of existing datacenters with our public cloud into a single, cohesive infrastructure, and the
ability to run at a scale that meets the needs of businesses of all sizes and complexities.  our enterprise services business competes
with a wide range of companies that provide strategy and business planning, application development, and infrastructure services, including multinational consulting firms and small niche businesses focused on specific technologies.
more personal computing  our more personal
computing segment consists of products and services geared towards harmonizing the interests of end users, developers, and it professionals across screens of all sizes. this segment primarily comprises:
windows, including windows oem licensing (windows oem) and other non-volume licensing of the windows operating system, volume licensing of the
windows operating system, patent licensing, windows embedded, msn display advertising, and windows phone licensing.
devices, including microsoft surface (surface), phones, and pc accessories.
table of contents
part i  item 1
gaming, including xbox hardware; xbox live, comprising transactions, subscriptions, and advertising; video games; and third-party video game royalties.
search advertising.  windows
the windows operating system is designed to deliver a more personal computing experience for users by enabling consistency of
experience, applications, and information across their devices. we consider the launch of windows 10 in july 2015 to be a transformative moment as we moved from an operating system that runs on a pc to a service that can power the full spectrum of
devices.  windows revenue is impacted significantly by the number of windows operating system licenses purchased by oems, which they
pre-install on the devices they sell. in addition to computing device market volume, windows revenue is impacted by:
the mix of computing devices based on form factor and screen size.
differences in device market demand between developed markets and emerging markets.
attachment of windows to devices shipped.
customer mix between consumer, small- and medium-sized businesses, and large enterprises.
changes in inventory levels in the oem channel.
pricing changes and promotions, pricing variation that occurs when the mix of devices manufactured shifts from local and regional system builders to large
multinational oems, and different pricing of windows versions licensed.
piracy.  volume licensing
of the windows operating system is affected mainly by the demand from commercial customers for volume licensing and software assurance, often reflecting the number of information workers in a licensed enterprise, and is therefore relatively
independent of the number of pcs sold in a given year.  patent licensing includes our programs to license patents across a broad array
of technology areas, including mobile devices and cloud offerings.  windows embedded extends the power of windows and the cloud to
intelligent systems by delivering specialized operating systems, tools, and services.  display advertising primarily includes msn ads.
in june 2015, we entered into agreements with aol and appnexus to outsource our display sales responsibility.  the windows phone
operating system is designed to bring users closer to the people, applications, and content they need. prior to our acquisition of nokia corporations (nokia) devices and services business (nds) in april 2014, microsoft
and nokia jointly created new mobile products and services and extended established products and services to new markets through a strategic alliance.
devices  we design, manufacture, and sell
devices such as surface, phones, and other intelligent devices, as well as pc accessories. our devices are designed to enable people and organizations to connect to the people and content that matter most using integrated microsoft services and
windows. surface is designed to help organizations, students, and consumers to be more productive. our latest surface devices, the surface pro 4 and surface book, were released in october 2015. we began manufacturing and selling microsoft lumia
(lumia) phones and other phones with the acquisition of nds in april 2014. in july 2015, we announced a plan to restructure our phone business to better focus and align resources. in may 2016, we announced plans to further streamline our
smartphone hardware business. we also recently announced the sale of our entry-level feature phone business in may 2016. the transaction is expected to close in the second half of 2016, subject to regulatory approvals and other closing conditions.
table of contents
part i  item 1
gaming  our gaming platform is designed to provide a unique variety of entertainment through the use of our devices, peripherals, applications, online services, and content. we released xbox 360 and xbox one in november
2005 and november2013, respectively, and recently announced xbox one s will be released in august 2016. we also launched our windows 10 xbox app in july 2015. xbox live enables people to connect and share online gaming experiences and is
accessible on xbox consoles, windows-enabled devices, and other devices.xbox live services consist of subscriptions and sales of xbox live enabled content, as well as advertising, and are designed to benefit users by providing access to a
network of certified applications and services and to benefit our developer and partner ecosystems by providing access to a large customer base. we also design and sell gaming content to showcase our unique platform capabilities for xbox consoles,
windows-enabled devices, and other devices. we acquired mojang synergies ab, the swedish video game developer of the minecraft gaming franchise, in november 2014. the addition of minecraft and its community enhances our gaming portfolio across
windows, xbox, and other ecosystems besides our own. we believe the success of our gaming business is determined by the overall active user base through xbox live enabled content, availability of games, providing exclusive game content that gamers
seek, the computational power and reliability of the devices used to access our content and services, and the ability to create new experiences via online services, downloadable content, and peripherals.
search advertising  search advertising,
including bing and bing ads, is designed to deliver relevant online advertising to a global audience. we have several partnerships with other companies, including yahoo!, in which we provide and monetize search results. growth depends on our ability
to attract new users, understand intent, and match intent with relevant content and advertiser offerings.  competition
the windows operating system faces competition from various software products and from alternative platforms and devices, mainly from apple and
google. we believe windows competes effectively by giving customers choice, value, flexibility, security, an easy-to-use interface, and compatibility with a broad range of hardware and software applications, including those that enable productivity.
our devices face competition from various computer, tablet, hardware, and phone manufacturers, and offer a unique combination of
high-quality industrial design and innovative technologies across various price points, many of which are also current or potential partners and customers. these manufacturers include apple, as well as our windows oem partners.
our gaming platform competes with console platforms from sony and nintendo, both of which have a large, established base of customers. the
lifecycle for gaming and entertainment consoles averages five to ten years. nintendo released their latest generation console in november 2012. sony released their latest generation console in november 2013.
in addition to sony and nintendo, we compete with other providers of entertainment services through online marketplaces.we believe our gaming
platform is effectively positioned against competitive products and services based on significant innovation in hardware architecture, user interface, developer tools, online gaming and entertainment services, and continued strong exclusive content
from our own game franchises as well as other digital content offerings. our video games competitors include electronic arts and activision blizzard. xbox live faces competition from various online marketplaces, including those operated by amazon,
apple, and google.  our search advertising business competes with google and a wide array of websites, social platforms like facebook,
and portals that provide content and online offerings to end users.
table of contents
part i  item 1
operations  we have operations centers that support all operations in their regions, including customer contract and order processing, credit and collections, information processing, and vendor management and logistics. the
regional center in ireland supports the european, middle eastern, and african region; the center in singapore supports the japan, india, greater china, and asia-pacific region; and the centers in fargo, north dakota, fort lauderdale, florida, puerto
rico, redmond, washington, and reno, nevada support latin america and north america. in addition to the operations centers, we also operate datacenters throughout the americas, australia, europe, and asia.
to serve the needs of customers around the world and to improve the quality and usability of products in international markets, we localize many of
our products to reflect local languages and conventions. localizing a product may require modifying the user interface, altering dialog boxes, and translating text.  we operate manufacturing facilities for the production and customization of phones, predominantly in vietnam. we announced the sale of our entry-level feature phone business in may 2016, which includes the sale of
our phone manufacturing facility in vietnam.  our devices, other than phones, are primarily manufactured by third-party contract
manufacturers. we generally have the ability to use other manufacturers if a current vendor becomes unavailable or unable to meet our requirements.  research and development  during fiscal years 2016, 2015, and 2014, research and development
expense was $12.0 billion, $12.0 billion, and $11.4billion, respectively. these amounts represented 14%, 13%, and 13% of revenue in fiscal years 2016, 2015, and 2014, respectively. we plan to continue to make significant investments in a broad
range of research and development efforts.  product and service development, and intellectual property
we develop most of our products and services internally through three engineering groups.
applications and services engineering group, focuses on broad applications and services core technologies in productivity, communication, education,
search, and other information categories.
cloud and enterprise engineering group, focuses on our cloud infrastructure, server, database, crm, enterprise resource planning, management,
development tools, and other business process applications and services for enterprises.
windows and devices engineering group, focuses on our windows platform across devices of all types, hardware development of our devices, and associated
online marketplaces.  internal development allows us to maintain competitive advantages that come from product
differentiation and closer technical control over our products and services. it also gives us the freedom to decide which modifications and enhancements are most important and when they should be implemented. we strive to obtain information as early
as possible about changing usage patterns and hardware advances that may affect software design. before releasing new software platforms, we provide application vendors with a range of resources and guidelines for development, training, and testing.
generally, we also create product documentation internally.  we protect our intellectual property investments in a variety of ways. we
work actively in the u.s. and internationally to ensure the enforcement of copyright, trademark, trade secret, and other protections that apply to our software and hardware products, services, business plans, and branding. we are a leader among
technology companies in pursuing patents and currently have a portfolio of over 61,000 u.s. and international patents issued and over 35,000
table of contents
part i  item 1
pending. while we employ much of our internally developed intellectual property exclusively in microsoft products and services, we also engage in outbound and inbound licensing of specific
patented technologies that are incorporated into licensees or microsofts products. from time to time, we enter into broader cross-license agreements with other technology companies covering entire groups of patents. we also purchase or
license technology that we incorporate into our products or services. at times, we make select intellectual property broadly available at no or low cost to achieve a strategic objective, such as promoting industry standards, advancing
interoperability, or attracting and enabling our external development community.  while it may be necessary in the future to seek or
renew licenses relating to various aspects of our products and business methods, we believe, based upon past experience and industry practice, such licenses generally could be obtained on commercially reasonable terms. we believe our continuing
research and product development are not materially dependent on any single license or other agreement with a third party relating to the development of our products.  investing in the future  microsofts success is based on our ability to create new and
compelling products, services, and experiences for our users, to initiate and embrace disruptive technology trends, to enter new geographic and product markets, and to drive broad adoption of our products and services. we invest in a range of
emerging technology trends and breakthroughs that we believe offer significant opportunities to deliver value to our customers and growth for the company. based on our assessment of key technology trends, we maintain our long-term commitment to
research and development across a wide spectrum of technologies, tools, and platforms spanning digital work and life experiences, cloud computing, and devices operating systems and hardware.
while our main research and development facilities are located in redmond, washington, we also operate research and development facilities in other
parts of the u.s. and around the world, including canada, china, denmark, finland, france, india, ireland, israel, japan, and the united kingdom. this global approach helps us remain competitive in local markets and enables us to continue to attract
top talent from across the world. we generally fund research at the corporate level to ensure that we are looking beyond immediate product considerations to opportunities further in the future. we also fund research and development activities at the
business segment level. much of our business segment level research and development is coordinated with other segments and leveraged across the company.  in addition to our main research and development operations, we also operate microsoft research. microsoft research is one of the worlds largest computer science research organizations, and works in close
collaboration with top universities around the world to advance the state-of-the-art in computer science, providing us a unique perspective on future technology trends and contributing to our innovation.
distribution, sales, and marketing  we market and distribute our products and services through the following channels: oems, distributors and resellers, online, and microsoft retail stores. our sales force performs a variety of functions, including
working directly with enterprises and public sector organizations worldwide to identify and meet their software requirements; managing oem relationships; and supporting solution integrators, independent software vendors, and other partners who
engage directly with our customers to perform sales, consulting, and fulfillment functions for our products.  oems
we distribute software through oems that pre-install our software on new devices and servers they sell. the largest component of the oem business
is the windows operating system pre-installed on computing devices. oems also sell hardware pre-installed with other microsoft products, including server and embedded operating systems and applications such as our microsoft office suite. in addition
to these products, we also market our services through oems and service bundles such as windows with bing or windows with office 365 subscription.
table of contents
part i  item 1
there are two broad categories of oems. the largest oems, many of which operate globally, are
referred to as direct oems, as our relationship with them is managed through a direct agreement between microsoft and the oem. we have distribution agreements covering one or more of our products with virtually all of the multinational
oems, including acer, asust, dell, fujitsu, hewlett-packard, lenovo, samsung, toshiba, and with many regional and local oems. the second broad category of oems consists of lower-volume pc manufacturers (also called system builders),
which source their microsoft software for pre-installation and local redistribution primarily through the microsoft distributor channel rather than through a direct agreement or relationship with microsoft.
distributors and resellers  many
organizations that license our products and services through enterprise agreements transact directly with us, with sales support from solution integrators, independent software vendors, web agencies, and developers that advise organizations on
licensing our products and services (enterprise agreement software advisors, or esas). organizations also license our products and services indirectly, primarily through licensing solution partners (lsps),
distributors, value-added resellers (vars), oems, system builder channels, and retailers. although each type of reselling partner reaches organizations of all sizes, lsps are primarily engaged with large organizations, distributors
resell primarily to vars, and vars typically reach small- and medium-sized organizations. esas typically are also authorized as lsps and operate as resellers for our other licensing programs, such as the select plus and open licensing programs
discussed under licensing options below. some of our distributors include ingram micro and tech data, and some of our largest resellers include cdw, dell, insight enterprises, and software house international.
our dynamics software offerings are also licensed to enterprises through a global network of channel partners providing vertical solutions and
specialized services. we distribute our retail packaged products primarily through independent non-exclusive distributors, authorized replicators, resellers, and retail outlets. individual consumers obtain these products primarily through retail
outlets, including microsoft retail stores. we distribute our devices through third-party retailers and microsoft retail stores. our phones are also distributed through global wireless communications carriers. we have a network of field sales
representatives and field support personnel that solicit orders from distributors and resellers, and provide product training and sales support.
online  although on-premises software
continues to be an important part of our business, increasingly we are delivering additional value to customers through cloud-based services. we provide commercial cloud-based solutions such as office 365, azure, and dynamics crm online. we also
provide online content services to consumers through bing, msn portals and channels, office 365, xbox live, outlook.com, onedrive, skype, and windows store. other services delivered online include our online advertising platform with offerings for
advertisers and publishers, as well as microsoft developer network subscription content and updates, periodic product updates, and online technical and practice readiness resources to support our partners in developing and selling our products and
solutions. as we increasingly deliver online services, we sell many of these cloud-based services through our enterprise agreements and have also enabled new sales programs to reach small and medium-sized businesses.these programs include
direct sales, direct sales supported by a large network of partner advisors, and resale of services through operator channels, such as telephone, cell, and cable providers.  we also sell our products through our microsoft retail stores and online marketplaces.  licensing
options  we license software to organizations under agreements that allow the customer to acquire multiple licenses of products and
services. our agreements for organizations to acquire multiple licenses of products and services are designed to provide them with a means of doing so without having to acquire separate licenses through retail channels. in delivering organizational
licensing agreements to the market, we use different programs designed to provide flexibility for organizations of various sizes. while these programs may differ in various parts of the world, generally they include those discussed below.
table of contents
part i  item 1
customer licensing programs  enterprise agreement licensing  designed primarily for medium- and large-sized organizations
that want to obtain the best value by standardizing on a common it platform across their organization. under the enterprise agreement, customers can acquire licenses for online services and/or software products with software assurance, which convey
rights to future versions of certain software products over the contract period. software assurance also provides support, tools, and training to help customers deploy and use software efficiently. enterprises can elect to acquire perpetual licenses
or, under the enterprise subscription option, can acquire non-perpetual, subscription licenses for a specified period (generally three years). online services are also available, and subscriptions are generally structured with three-year terms.
microsoft product and services agreement licensing  suited for medium- and large-sized organizations, the microsoft products and services agreement (mpsa) provides customers the ability to purchase online services subscriptions, software licenses,
software licenses with software assurance, and renewals of software assurance through a single agreement.software assurance and online services subscriptions are generally available for a term of up to three years. we plan on expanding the
offers under the mpsa in fiscal year 2017 to better enable organizations to obtain the best value by standardizing on a common it platform across their organization.  select plus licensing  designed primarily for medium- and large-sized organizations, the
select plus program allows customers to acquire perpetual licenses and, at the customers election, software assurance over a specified time period (generally three years or less). similar to open programs, the select plus program allows
customers to acquire licenses only, acquire licenses with software assurance, or renew software assurance upon the expiration of existing volume licensing agreements. a subset of online services is also available for purchase through the select plus
program, and subscriptions are generally structured with terms between one and three years.  in july 2014, we announced the retirement
over a two-year period of select plus agreements for commercial customers, in favor of modern licensing options. beginning july 2015, no new select plus agreements were signed with commercial organizations, and customers who want to purchase
licenses were encouraged to transition to the mpsa. starting in july 2016, we will no longer be accepting orders from commercial organizations for select plus after their next agreement anniversary. we expect the entire select plus business to
transition to the mpsa within a few years.  open licensing  designed primarily for small- and medium-sized organizations, the open programs allow customers to acquire perpetual or subscription licenses and, at the customers election, rights to future versions of
software products over a specified time period (generally two or three years depending on the specific programs used). the open programs have several variations to fit customers diverse ways of purchasing. under the open license program,
customers can acquire licenses only or licenses with software assurance, and/or renew software assurance upon the expiration of other existing volume licensing agreements. under the open value and open value subscription programs, customers can
acquire perpetual or subscription licenses, respectively, over a three-year period. online services are available in each of the open programs.
customer licensing programs  online services only  microsoft online subscription agreement is designed to enable small and medium-sized businesses to easily purchase microsoft online services. the program allows customers to acquire monthly or annual subscriptions
for cloud-based services.
table of contents
part i  item 1
partner programs  the microsoft cloud solution provider program enables partners to directly manage their entire microsoft cloud customer lifecycle. partners in this program use dedicated tools to directly provision, manage, and
support their customer subscriptions. partners can easily package their own tools, products, and services, and combine them into one monthly or annual customer bill.  the microsoft services provider license agreement is a program targeted at service providers and independent software vendors allowing these partners to provide software services and hosted applications to their
end customers. agreements are generally structured with a three-year term, and partners are billed monthly based upon consumption.  the
microsoft online services reseller agreement is a program that enables partners to package microsoft online services with the partners services.  the independent software vendor royalty program enables partners to use microsoft software in their own software programs.  customers  our customers include individual consumers, small- and medium-sized organizations,
large global enterprises, public sector institutions, internet service providers, application developers, and oems. no sales to an individual customer accounted for more than 10% of revenue in fiscal years 2016, 2015, or 2014. our practice is to
ship our products promptly upon receipt of purchase orders from customers; consequently, backlog is not significant.
executive officers of the registrant  our executive officers as of july28, 2016 were as follows:
name
age
position with the company
satyanadella
chief executive officer
christopherc.capossela
executive vice president, chief marketing officer
jean-philippe courtois
executive vice president and president, microsoft global sales, marketing and operations
kathleen t. hogan
executive vice president, human resources
amy e. hood
executive vice president, chief financial officer
margaret l. johnson
executive vice president, business development
bradford l. smith
president and chief legal officer
mr.nadella was appointed chief executive officer in february 2014. he served as executive vice president,
cloud and enterprise since july 2013. from 2011 to 2013, mr.nadella served as president, server and tools. from 2009 to 2011, he was senior vice president, online services division. from 2008 to 2009, he was senior vice president, search,
portal, and advertising. since joining microsoft in 1992, mr.nadellas roles also included vice president of the business division.  mr.capossela was appointed executive vice president, chief marketing officer in march 2014.previously, he served as the worldwide leader of the consumer channels group, responsible for sales and
marketing activities with oems, operators, and retail partners.in his more than 20 years at microsoft, mr.capossela has held a variety of marketing leadership roles in the microsoft office division.he was responsible for marketing
productivity solutions including microsoft office, office 365, sharepoint, exchange, skype for business, project, and visio.
mr.courtois was named executive vice president and president, microsoft global sales, marketing and operations in july 2016. before that he
was president of microsoft international since june 2005. he had been chief executive officer, microsoft europe, middle east, and africa since march 2003. previous to that, he had been senior vice
table of contents
part i  item 1
president and president, microsoft europe, middle east, and africa since july 2000. before holding that position, he had been corporate vice president, worldwide customer marketing since july
1998. mr.courtois joined microsoft in 1984. he also serves on the board of directors of astrazeneca plc.  ms.hogan was
appointed executive vice president, human resources in november 2014. prior to that ms.hogan was corporate vice president of microsoft services. she also served as corporate vice president of customer service and support. ms.hogan joined
microsoft in 2003.  ms.hood was appointed executive vice president and chief financial officer in july 2013, subsequent to her
appointment as chief financial officer in may 2013. beginning in 2010, ms.hood was chief financial officer of the microsoft business division. from 2006 through 2009, ms.hood was general manager, microsoft business division
strategy.since joining microsoft in 2002, ms.hood has also held finance-related positions in the server and tools business and the corporate finance organization.  ms.johnson was appointed executive vice president, business development in september 2014. prior to that ms.johnson spent 24 years at qualcomm in various leadership positions across engineering, sales,
marketing and business development. she most recently served as executive vice president of qualcomm technologies, inc. ms.johnson also serves on the board of directors of live nation entertainment, inc.
mr.smith was appointed president and chief legal officer in september 2015. prior to that he served as executive vice president, general
counsel, and secretary since 2011, and served as senior vice president, general counsel, and secretary from 2001 to 2011. mr.smith was also named chief compliance officer in 2002. he had been deputy general counsel for worldwide sales and
previously was responsible for managing the european law and corporate affairs group, based in paris. mr.smith joined microsoft in 1993. mr.smith also serves on the board of directors of netflix, inc.
employees  as of
june30, 2016, we employed approximately 114,000 people on a full-time basis, 63,000 in the u.s. and 51,000 internationally. of the total employed people, 38,000 were in operations, including manufacturing, distribution, product support, and
consulting services; 37,000 in product research and development; 29,000 in sales and marketing; and 10,000 in general and administration. certain employees are subject to collective bargaining agreements.
in june 2015, management approved a restructuring plan that eliminated approximately 7,400 positions in fiscal year 2016, primarily in our phone
hardware business.  we periodically evaluate how to best deploy the companys resources. in the fourth quarter of 2016, management
approved restructuring plans that would result in job eliminations, primarily across our smartphone hardware business and global sales. in addition to the elimination of 1,850 positions that were announced in may 2016, approximately 2,850 roles
globally will be reduced during the year as an extension of the earlier plan, and these actions are expected to be completed by the end of fiscal year 2017.  available information  our internet address is www.microsoft.com. at our investor relations
website, www.microsoft.com/investor, we make available free of charge a variety of information for investors. our goal is to maintain the investor relations website as a portal through which investors can easily find or navigate to pertinent
information about us, including:
our annual report on form 10-k, quarterly reports on form 10-q, current reports on form 8-k, and any amendments to those reports, as soon as reasonably
practicable after we electronically file that material with or furnish it to the securities and exchange commission (sec).
information on our business strategies, financial results, and metrics for investors.
announcements of investor conferences, speeches, and events at which our executives talk about our product, service, and competitive strategies. archives of
these events are also available.
press releases on quarterly earnings, product and service announcements, legal developments, and international news.
table of contents
part i  item 1, 1a
corporate governance information including our articles of incorporation, bylaws, governance guidelines, committee charters, codes of conduct and ethics,
global corporate social responsibility initiatives, and other governance-related policies.
other news and announcements that we may post from time to time that investors might find useful or interesting.
opportunities to sign up for email alerts and rss feeds to have information pushed in real time.
the information found on our website is not part of this or any other report we file with, or furnish to, the sec. in addition to these channels,
we use social media to communicate to the public. it is possible that the information we post on social media could be deemed to be material to investors. we encourage investors, the media, and others interested in microsoft to review the
information we post on the social media channels listed on our investor relations website.
item1a.risk factors  our operations and financial results are subject to various risks and uncertainties, including those described below, that could adversely affect our business, financial condition, results of operations, cash
flows, and the trading price of our common stock.  we face intense competition across all markets for our products and services, which may lead to
lower revenue or operating margins.  competition in the technology sector
our competitors range in size from diversified global companies with significant research and development resources to small, specialized firms
whose narrower product lines may let them be more effective in deploying technical, marketing, and financial resources. barriers to entry in many of our businesses are low and many of the areas in which we compete evolve rapidly with changing and
disruptive technologies, shifting user needs, and frequent introductions of new products and services. our ability to remain competitive depends on our success in making innovative products, devices, and services that appeal to businesses and
consumers.  competition among platforms, ecosystems, and devices  an important element of our business model has been to create platform-based ecosystems on which many participants can build diverse solutions. a well-established ecosystem creates beneficial network effects among
users, application developers, and the platform provider that can accelerate growth. establishing significant scale in the marketplace is necessary to achieve and maintain attractive margins. we face significant competition from firms that provide
competing platforms, applications, and services.
a competing vertically-integrated model, in which a single firm controls the software and hardware elements of a product and related services, has succeeded
with some consumer products such as personal computers, tablets, phones, gaming consoles, and wearables. competitors pursuing this model also earn revenue from services integrated with the hardware and software platform. we also offer some
vertically-integrated hardware and software products and services. to the extent we shift a portion of our business to a vertically integrated model we increase our cost of revenue and reduce our operating margins.
we derive substantial revenue from licenses of windows operating systems on personal computers. we face significant competition from competing platforms
developed for new devices and form factors such as smartphones and tablet computers. these devices compete on multiple bases including price and the perceived utility of the device and its platform. users are increasingly turning to these devices to
perform functions that in the past were performed by personal computers. even if many users view these devices as complementary to a personal computer, the prevalence of these devices may make it more difficult to
table of contents
part i  item 1a
attract application developers to our pc operating system platforms. competing with operating systems licensed at low or no cost may decrease our pc operating system margins. in addition, some of
our devices compete with products made by our oem partners, which may affect their commitment to our platform.
competing platforms have application marketplaces (sometimes referred to as stores) with scale and significant installed bases. the variety and
utility of applications available on a platform are important to device purchasing decisions. users incur costs to move data and buy new applications when switching platforms. to compete, we must successfullyenlist developers to write
applications for our marketplace and ensure that these applications have high quality, customer appeal, and value. efforts to compete with competitors application marketplaces may increase our cost of revenue and lower our operating margins.
business model competition  companies compete with us based on a growing variety of business models.
even as we transition to a mobile-first and cloud-first strategy, the license-based proprietary software model generates most of our software revenue. we bear
the costs of converting original ideas into software products through investments in research and development, offsetting these costs with the revenue received from licensing our products. many of our competitors also develop and sell software to
businesses and consumers under this model.
other competitors develop and offer free applications, online services and content, and make money by selling third-party advertising. advertising revenue
funds development of products and services these competitors provide to users at no or little cost, competing directly with our revenue-generating products.
some companies compete with us using an open source business model by modifying and then distributing open source software at nominal cost to end-users, and
earning revenue on advertising or complementary services and products. these firms do not bear the full costs of research and development for the software. some open source software vendors develop software that mimics the features and functionality
of our products.  the competitive pressures described above may cause decreased sales volumes, price reductions,
and/or increased operating costs, such as for research and development, marketing, and sales incentives. this may lead to lower revenue, gross margins, and operating income.  our increasing focus on services presents execution and competitive risks.a growing part of our business involves cloud-based services available across the spectrum of computing
devices. our strategic vision is to compete and grow as a productivity and platform company for the mobile-first and cloud-first world. at the same time, our competitors are rapidly developing and deploying cloud-based services for consumers and
business customers. pricing and delivery models are evolving. devices and form factors influence how users access services in the cloud and sometimes the users choice of which suite of cloud-based services to use. we are devoting significant
resources to develop and deploy our cloud-based strategies. the windows ecosystem must continue to evolve with this changing environment. we are undertaking cultural and organizational changes to drive accountability and eliminate obstacles to
innovation. the companys increasing reliance on data-driven insights is becoming more important to the success of key opportunities in monetization, customer perceptions of quality, and operational efficiency. besides software development
costs, we are incurring costs to build and maintain infrastructure to support cloud computing services. these costs will reduce the operating margins we have previously achieved. whether we succeed in cloud-based services depends on our execution in
several areas, including:
continuing to bring to market compelling cloud-based experiences that generate increasing traffic and market share.
maintaining the utility, compatibility, and performance of our cloud-based services on the growing array of computing devices, including pcs, smartphones,
tablets, gaming consoles, and other television-related devices.
continuing to enhance the attractiveness of our cloud platforms to third-party developers.
table of contents
part i  item 1a
ensuring our cloud-based services meet the reliability expectations of our customers and maintain the security of their data.
making our suite of cloud-based services platform-agnostic, available on a wide range of devices and ecosystems, including those of our competitors.
it is uncertain whether our strategies will attract the users or generate the revenue required to succeed. if we are
not effective in executing organizational and technical changes to increase efficiency and accelerate innovation, or if we fail to generate sufficient usage of our new products and services, we may not grow revenue in line with the infrastructure
and development investments described above. this may negatively impact gross margins and operating income.  we make significant
investments in new products and services that may not achieve expected returns.we will continue to make significant investments in research, development, and marketing for existing products, services, and technologies,
including the windows operating system, the microsoft office system, bing, windows phone, windows server, the windows store, the microsoft azure services platform, office 365, other cloud-based offerings, and the xbox entertainment platform. we also
invest in the development and acquisition of a variety of hardware for productivity, communication, and entertainment including pcs, tablets, phones, and gaming devices. investments in new technology are speculative. commercial success depends on
many factors, including innovativeness, developer support, and effective distribution and marketing. if customers do not perceive our latest offerings as providing significant new functionality or other value, they may reduce their purchases of new
software and hardware products or upgrades, unfavorably affecting revenue. we may not achieve significant revenue from new product, service, and distribution channel investments for several years, if at all. new products and services may not be
profitable, and even if they are profitable, operating margins for some new products and businesses will not be as high as the margins we have experienced historically.  the launch of windows 10, with free upgrades available to existing users of windows 7 and 8.1, constitutes the most ambitious update effort we have ever undertaken. we have done extensive preparation and
compatibility testing for applications and devices to help ensure a positive experience for our users installing windows 10. however, if users have a negative upgrade experience, or the community reacts negatively to the process we are following to
promote and undertake the upgrades, the reception of windows10 in the marketplace may be harmed, and customers or government agencies may bring litigation or regulatory actions.in addition, we anticipate that windows10 will enable
new post-license monetization opportunities beyond initial license revenues.our failure to realize these opportunities to the extent we expect could have an adverse impact on our revenues. finally, our practices around data collection, use,
and management in windows 10 could result in regulatory review and decisions directing us to change these practices and imposing fines. if so, we could face negative public reaction, degraded user experiences, and reduced flexibility in product
design.  developing new technologies is complex. it can require long development and testing periods. significant delays in new releases
or significant problems in creating new products or services could adversely affect our revenue.  acquisitions, joint ventures, and
strategic alliances may have an adverse effect on our business.we expect to continue making acquisitions and entering into joint ventures and strategic alliances as part of our long-term business strategy. in june 2016,
we announced our acquisition of linkedin for approximately $26.2 billion. the linkedin acquisition and other transactions and arrangements involve significant challenges and risks, including that they do not advance our business strategy, that we
get an unsatisfactory return on our investment, that we have difficulty integrating new employees, business systems, and technology, or that they distract management from our other businesses. if an arrangement fails to adequately anticipate
changing circumstances and interests of a party, it may result in early termination or renegotiation of the arrangement. the success of these transactions and arrangements will depend in part on our ability to leverage them to enhance our existing
products and services or develop compelling new ones. it may take longer than expected to realize the full benefits from these transactions and arrangements, such as increased revenue, enhanced efficiencies, or increased market share, or the
benefits may ultimately be smaller than we expected. these events could adversely affect our operating results or financial condition.
table of contents
part i  item 1a
if our goodwill or amortizable intangible assets become impaired, we may be required to record
a significant charge to earnings.we acquire other companies and intangible assets and may not realize all the economic benefit from those acquisitions, which could cause an impairment of goodwill or intangibles. we review
our amortizable intangible assets for impairment when events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value may not be recoverable. we test goodwill for impairment at least annually. factors that may be a change in circumstances, indicating
that the carrying value of our goodwill or amortizable intangible assets may not be recoverable, include a decline in our stock price and market capitalization, reduced future cash flow estimates, and slower growth rates in industry segments in
which we participate. we may be required to record a significant charge on our consolidated financial statements during the period in which any impairment of our goodwill or amortizable intangible assets is determined, negatively affecting our
results of operations. for example, in the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2015, we recorded a $5.1 billion charge for the impairment of goodwill and a $2.2 billion charge for the impairment of intangible assets, and in the fourth quarter of fiscal
year 2016 we recorded a $480 million charge for the impairment of intangible assets. the impairment charges for both periods related to our phone business. our acquisition of linkedin will result in a significant increase in our goodwill and
intangible asset balances.  we may not earn the revenues we expect from our intellectual property rights.
we may not be able to adequately protect our intellectual property rights  protecting our global intellectual property rights and combating unlicensed copying and use of our software and other intellectual property is difficult. while piracy adversely affects u.s. revenue, the impact on
revenue from outside the u.s. is more significant, particularly in countries where laws are less protective of intellectual property rights. our revenue in these markets may grow slower than the underlying device market. similarly, the absence of
harmonized patent laws makes it more difficult to ensure consistent respect for patent rights. throughout the world, we educate consumers about the benefits of licensing genuine products and obtaining indemnification benefits for intellectual
property risks, and we educate lawmakers about the advantages of a business climate where intellectual property rights are protected. reductions in the legal protection for software intellectual property rights could adversely affect revenue.
we may not receive expected royalties from our patent licenses  we expend significant resources to patent the intellectual property we create with the expectation that we will generate revenues by incorporating that intellectual property in our products or services or, in some
instances, by licensing our patents to others in return for a royalty.changes in the law may weaken our ability to prevent the use of patented technology or collect revenue for licensing our patents.these include legislative changes and
regulatory actions that make it more difficult to obtain injunctions, and the increasing use of legal process to challenge issued patents. similarly, licensees of our patents may fail to satisfy their obligations to pay us royalties, or may contest
the scope and extent of their obligations. finally, the royalties we can obtain to monetize our intellectual property may decline because of the evolution of technology, selling price changes in products using licensed patents, or the difficulty of
discovering infringements.  third parties may claim we infringe their intellectual property rights.from
time to time, others claim we infringe their intellectual property rights. the number of these claims may grow because of constant technological change in the markets in which we compete, the extensive patent coverage of existing technologies, the
rapid rate of issuance of new patents, and our offering of first-party devices, such as surface and lumia phones. to resolve these claims, we may enter into royalty and licensing agreements on terms that are less favorable than currently available,
stop selling or redesign affected products or services, or pay damages to satisfy indemnification commitments with our customers. these outcomes may cause operating margins to decline. besides money damages, in some jurisdictions plaintiffs can seek
injunctive relief that may limit or prevent importing, marketing, and selling our products or services that have infringing technologies. in some countries, such as germany, an injunction can be issued before the parties have fully litigated the
validity of the underlying patents. we have paid significant amounts to settle claims related to the use of technology and intellectual property rights and to procure intellectual property rights as part of our strategy to manage this risk, and may
continue to do so.
table of contents
part i  item 1a
we may not be able to protect our source code from copying if there is an unauthorized
disclosure of source code.source code, the detailed program commands for our operating systems and other software programs, is critical to our business. although we license portions of our application and operating system
source code to several licensees, we take significant measures to protect the secrecy of large portions of our source code. if a significant portion of our source code leaks, we might lose future trade secret protection for that source code. it may
become easier for third parties to compete with our products by copying functionality, which could adversely affect our revenue and operating margins. unauthorized disclosure of source code also could increase the security risks described in the
next paragraph.  cyber-attacks and security vulnerabilities could lead to reduced revenue, increased costs, liability claims, or harm to our
competitive position.  security of microsofts information technology
threats to it security can take a variety of forms. individual and groups of hackers, and sophisticated organizations including state-sponsored
organizations or nation-states themselves, may take steps that pose threats to our customers and our it.these actors may use a wide variety of methods, which may include developing and deploying malicious software to attack our products and
services and gain access to our networks and datacenters, using social engineering techniques, or acting in a coordinated manner to launch distributed denial of service or other coordinated attacks. cyber threats are constantly evolving, thereby
increasing the difficulty of detecting and successfully defending against them. cyber threats can have cascading impacts that unfold with increasing speed across our internal networks and systems and those of our partners and customers. breaches of
our network or data security could disrupt the security of our internal systems and business applications, impair our ability to provide services to our customers and protect the privacy of their data, result in product development delays,
compromise confidential or technical business information harming our competitive position, result in theft or misuse of our intellectual property or other assets, require us to allocate more resources to improved technologies, or otherwise
adversely affect our business.  in addition, our internal it environment continues to evolve. often we are early adopters of new devices
and technologies. we embrace new ways of sharing data and communicating internally and with partners and customers using methods such as social networking and other consumer-oriented technologies. our business policies and internal security controls
may not keep pace with these changes as new threats emerge.  security of our products, services, devices, and customers data
security threats are a particular challenge to companies like us whose business is technology products and services. threats to our own it
infrastructure can also affect our customers. customers using our cloud-based services rely on the security of our infrastructure to ensure the reliability of our services and the protection of their data. hackers tend to focus their efforts on the
most popular operating systems, programs, and services, including many of ours, and we expect that to continue. the security of our products and services is important in our customers purchasing decisions.
to defend against security threats, both to our internal it systems and those of our customers, we must continuously engineer more secure products
and services, enhance security and reliability features, improve the deployment of software updates to address security vulnerabilities, develop mitigation technologies that help to secure customers from attacks even when software updates are not
deployed, maintain the digital security infrastructure that protects the integrity of our network, products, and services, and provide customers security tools such as firewalls and anti-virus software.
the cost of these steps could reduce our operating margins. if we fail to do these things well, actual or perceived security vulnerabilities in our
products and services could harm our reputation and lead customers to reduce or delay future purchases of products or subscriptions to services, or to use competing products or services. customers may also spend more on protecting their existing
computer systems from attack, which could delay adoption of additional
table of contents
part i  item 1a
products or services. customers may fail to update their systems, continue to run software or operating systems we no longer support, or may fail timely to install security patches. any of these
actions by customers could adversely affect our revenue. actual or perceived vulnerabilities may lead to claims against us. although our license agreements typically contain provisions that eliminate or limit our exposure to liability, there is no
assurance these provisions will withstand legal challenges. legislative or regulatory action in these areas may increase the costs to develop, implement, or secure our products and services.
disclosure of personal data could cause liability and harm our reputation.as we continue to grow the number and
scale of our cloud-based offerings, we store and process increasingly large amounts of personally identifiable information of our customers. the continued occurrence of high-profile data breaches provides evidence of an external environment
increasingly hostile to information security. despite our efforts to improve the security controls across our business groups and geographies, it is possible our security controls over personal data, our training of employees and vendors on data
security, and other practices we follow may not prevent the improper disclosure of customer data we or our vendors store and manage. improper disclosure could harm our reputation, lead to legal exposure to customers, or subject us to liability under
laws that protect personal data, resulting in increased costs or loss of revenue. our software products and services also enable our customers to store and process personal data on-premises or, increasingly, in a cloud-based environment we host.
government authorities can sometimes require us to produce customer data in response to valid legal orders. in the u.s. and elsewhere, we advocate for transparency concerning these requests and appropriate limitations on government authority to
compel disclosure. despite our efforts to protect customer data, perceptions that the collection, use and retention of personal information is not satisfactorily protected could inhibit sales of our products or services, and could limit adoption of
our cloud-based solutions by consumers, businesses, and government entities. additional security measures we may take to address customer concerns, or constraints on our flexibility to determine where and how to operate datacenters in response to
customer expectations or governmental rules or actions, may cause higher operating expenses.  we may have outages, data losses, and
disruptions of our online services if we fail to maintain an adequate operations infrastructure.our increasing user traffic, growth in services, and the complexity of our products and services demand more computing power.
we spend substantial amounts to build, purchase, or lease datacenters and equipment and to upgrade our technology and network infrastructure to handle more traffic on our websites and in our datacenters. these demands continue to increase as we
introduce new products and services and support the growth of existing services such as bing, exchange online, office 365, sharepoint online, onedrive, skype, xbox live, microsoft azure, outlook.com, windows stores, and microsoft account services.
we are rapidly growing our business of providing a platform and back-end hosting for services provided by third parties to their end users. maintaining, securing, and expanding this infrastructure is expensive and complex. it requires that we
maintain an internet connectivity infrastructure that is robust and reliable within competitive and regulatory constraints that continue to evolve. inefficiencies or operational failures, including temporary or permanent loss of customer data or
insufficient internet connectivity, could diminish the quality of our products, services, and user experience resulting in contractual liability, claims by customers and other third parties, damage to our reputation and loss of current and potential
users, subscribers, and advertisers, each of which may harm our operating results and financial condition.  government litigation and
regulatory activity relating to competition rules may limit how we design and market our products.as a leading global software and device maker, we are closely scrutinized by government agencies under u.s. and foreign
competition laws. an increasing number of governments are regulating competition law activities and this includes increased scrutiny in potentially large markets such as the european union (eu), the u.s., and china. some jurisdictions
also allow competitors or consumers to assert claims of anti-competitive conduct. u.s. federal and state antitrust authorities have previously brought enforcement actions and continue to scrutinize our business.
the european commission (the commission) closely scrutinizes the design of high-volume microsoft products and the terms on which we
make certain technologies used in these products, such as file formats, programming interfaces, and protocols, available to other companies. flagship product releases such as windows 10 can receive significant scrutiny under competition laws. for
example, in 2004, the commission ordered us to create new versions of our windows operating system that do not include certain multimedia technologies and to provide our
table of contents
part i  item 1a
competitors with specifications for how to implement certain proprietary windows communications protocols in their own products. in 2009, the commission accepted a set of commitments offered by
microsoft to address the commissions concerns relating to competition in web browsing software, including an undertaking to address commission concerns relating to interoperability. the web browsing commitments expired in 2014. the remaining
obligations may limit our ability to innovate in windows or other products in the future, diminish the developer appeal of the windows platform, and increase our product development costs. the availability of licenses related to protocols and file
formats may enable competitors to develop software products that better mimic the functionality of our products, which could hamper sales of ourproducts.  our portfolio of first-party devices continues to grow; at the same time our oem partners offer a large variety of devices on our platforms. as a result, increasingly we both cooperate and compete with our oem
partners, creating a risk that we fail to do so in compliance with competition rules. regulatory scrutiny in this area may increase. certain foreign governments, particularly in china and other countries in asia, have advanced arguments under their
competition laws that exert downward pressure on royalties for our intellectual property. because these jurisdictions only recently implemented competition laws, their enforcement activities are unpredictable.
government regulatory actions and court decisions such as these may hinder our ability to provide the benefits of our software to consumers and
businesses, reducing the attractiveness of our products and the revenue that come from them. new competition law actions could be initiated. the outcome of such actions, or steps taken to avoid them, could adversely affect us in a variety of ways,
including:
we may have to choose between withdrawing products from certain geographies to avoid fines or designing and developing alternative versions of those products
to comply with government rulings, which may entail a delay in a product release and removing functionality that customers want or on which developers rely.
we may be required to make available licenses to our proprietary technologies on terms that do not reflect their fair market value or do not protect our
associated intellectual property.
the rulings described above may be precedent in other competition law proceedings.
we are subject to a variety of ongoing commitments because of court or administrative orders, consent decrees, or other voluntary actions we have taken. if we
fail to comply with these commitments, we may incur litigation costs and be subject to substantial fines or other remedial actions.
our ability to realize anticipated windows 10 post-sale monetization opportunities may be limited.
our global operations subject us to potential liability under anti-corruption, trade protection, and other laws and
regulations.the foreign corrupt practices act and other anti-corruption laws and regulations (anti-corruption laws) prohibit corrupt payments by our employees, vendors, or agents. from time to time, we receive
inquiries from authorities in the u.s. and elsewhere and reports from employees and others about our business activities outside the u.s. and our compliance with anti-corruption laws. specifically, we have been cooperating with authorities in the us
in connection with reports concerning our compliance with the foreign corrupt practices act in various countries. while we devote substantial resources to our global compliance programs and have implemented policies, training, and internal controls
designed to reduce the risk of corrupt payments, our employees, vendors, or agents may violate our policies. our failure to comply with anti-corruption laws could result in significant fines and penalties, criminal sanctions against us, our
officers, or our employees, prohibitions on the conduct of our business, and damage to our reputation. geopolitical instability may lead to sanctions and impact our ability to do business in some geographies. operations outside the u.s. may be
affected by changes in trade protection laws, policies, and measures, sanctions, and other regulatory requirements affecting trade and investment. we may be subject to legal liability and reputational damage if we sell goods or services in violation
of u.s. trade sanctions on countries such as iran, north korea, cuba, sudan, and syria.  other regulatory areas that may apply to our
products and online services offerings include user privacy, telecommunications, data storage and protection, and online content. for example, regulators may take the position that our offerings such as skype are covered by laws regulating
telecommunications services. applying these laws and regulations to our business is often unclear, subject to change over time, and sometimes may conflict from
table of contents
part i  item 1a
jurisdiction to jurisdiction. additionally, these laws and governments approach to their enforcement, and our products and services, are continuing to evolve. compliance with these types of
regulation may involve significant costs or require changes in products or business practices that result in reduced revenue. noncompliance could result in the imposition of penalties or orders we stop the alleged noncompliant activity.
laws and regulations relating to the handling of personal data may impede the adoption of our services or result in increased costs, legal
claims, or fines against us.the growth of our internet- and cloud-based services internationally relies increasingly on the movement of data across national boundaries. legal requirements relating to the collection,
storage, handling, and transfer of personal data continue to evolve. for example, in october 2015 the european court of justice (ecj) invalidated the eu/u.s. safe harbor framework, in place since 2000, that enabled companies to transfer
data from eu member states to the u.s. although other legally-recognized methods to enable data transfers currently remain valid, the reasoning of the ecj striking down the safe harbor framework could be used to challenge those methods in future
complaints. there is a recognized need for a new regulatory safe harbor framework that will also support other methods of data transfer between the eu and u.s. outcomes may include a new trans-atlantic data transfer agreement, a new eu data
protection directive, or a range of legal requirements adopted by individual eu member states, or no action at all. one or more of these outcomes may result in burdensome or inconsistent requirements affecting the location and movement of our
customer and internal employee data as well as the management of that data. compliance may require changes in services, business practices, or internal systems that result in increased costs, lower revenue, reduced efficiency, or greater difficulty
in competing with foreign-based firms. failure to comply with existing or new rules may result in significant penalties or orders to stop the alleged noncompliant activity.  our business depends on our ability to attract and retain talented employees.our business is based on successfully attracting and retaining talented employees. the market for highly
skilled workers and leaders in our industry is extremely competitive. we are limited in our ability to recruit internationally by restrictive domestic immigration laws. if we are less successful in our recruiting efforts, or if we cannot retain key
employees, our ability to develop and deliver successful products and services may be adversely affected. effective succession planning is also important to our long-term success. failure to ensure effective transfer of knowledge and smooth
transitions involving key employees could hinder our strategic planning and execution. how employment-related laws are interpreted and applied to our workforce practices may result in increased operating costs and less flexibility in how we meet our
workforce needs.  we have claims and lawsuits against us that may result in adverse outcomes.we are
subject to a variety of claims and lawsuits. these claims may arise from a wide variety of business practices and initiatives, including major new product releases such as windows 10, significant business transactions, and employment practices.
adverse outcomes in some or all of these claims may result in significant monetary damages or injunctive relief that could adversely affect our ability to conduct our business. the litigation and other claims are subject to inherent uncertainties
and managements view of these matters may change in the future. a material adverse impact on our consolidated financial statements could occur for the period in which the effect of an unfavorable final outcome becomes probable and reasonably
estimable.  we may have additional tax liabilities.we are subject to income taxes in the u.s. and many
foreign jurisdictions. significant judgment is required in determining our worldwide provision for income taxes. in the ordinary course of our business, there are many transactions and calculations where the ultimate tax determination is uncertain.
we regularly are under audit by tax authorities in different jurisdictions. economicand politicalpressures to increase tax revenue in various jurisdictions may make resolving tax disputes favorably more difficult. although we believe our
tax estimates are reasonable, the final determination of tax audits and any related litigation in the jurisdictions where we are subject to taxation could be materially different from our historical income tax provisions and accruals. the results of
an audit or litigation could have a material effect on our consolidated financial statements in the period or periods in which that determination is made.  we earn a significant amount of our operating income from outside the u.s., and any repatriation of funds currently held in foreign jurisdictions to the u.s. may result in higher effective tax rates for the
company. in addition, there have been proposals from congress to change u.s. tax laws that would significantly impact how u.s. multinational corporations are taxed on foreign earnings. although we cannot predict whether or in what form any proposed
legislation may pass, if enacted, it could have a material adverse impact on our tax expense and cash flows.
table of contents
part i  item 1a
our hardware and software products may experience quality or supply
problems.our vertically-integrated hardware products such as xbox consoles, surface devices, phones, and other devices we design, manufacture, and market are highly complex and can have defects in design, manufacture, or
associated software. we could incur significant expenses, lost revenue, and reputational harm if we fail to detect or address such issues through design, testing, or warranty repairs. we acquire some device components from sole suppliers. our
competitors use some of the same suppliers and their demand for hardware components can affect the capacity available to us. if a component from a sole-source supplier is delayed or becomes unavailable, whether because of supplier capacity
constraint or industry shortages, we may not obtain timely replacement supplies, resulting in reduced sales. component shortages, excess or obsolete inventory, or price reductions resulting in inventory adjustments may increase our cost of revenue.
xbox consoles, surface devices, phones, and other hardware are assembled in asia and other geographies that may be subject to disruptions in the supply chain, resulting in shortages that would affect our revenue and operating margins. these same
risks would apply to any other vertically-integrated hardware and software products we may offer.  our software products also may
experience quality or reliability problems. the highly sophisticated software products we develop may contain bugs and other defects that interfere with their intended operation. any defects we do not detect and fix in pre-release testing could
cause reduced sales and revenue, damage to our reputation, repair or remediation costs, delays in the release of new products or versions, or legal liability. although our license agreements typically contain provisions that eliminate or limit our
exposure to liability, there is no assurance these provisions will withstand legal challenge.  we strive to empower all people and
organizations to achieve more and accessibility of our products is an important aspect of this goal. there is increasing pressure from advocacy groups, regulators, competitors, and customers to make technology more accessible. if our products do not
meet customer expectations or emerging global accessibility requirements, we could lose sales opportunities or face regulatory actions.
our global business exposes us to operational and economic risks.our customers are located in over 200 countries and
a significant part of our revenue comes from international sales. the global nature of our business creates operational and economic risks. emerging markets are a significant focus of our international growth strategy. the developing nature of these
markets presents several risks, including deterioration of social, political, labor, or economic conditions in a country or region, and difficulties in staffing and managing foreign operations. although we hedge a portion of our international
currency exposure, significant fluctuations in foreign exchange rates between the u.s. dollar and foreign currencies may adversely affect our revenue. competitive or regulatory pressure to make our pricing structure uniform might require that we
reduce the sales price of our software in the u.s. and other countries.  catastrophic events or geopolitical conditions may disrupt
our business.a disruption or failure of our systems or operations because of a major earthquake, weather event, cyber-attack, terrorist attack, or other catastrophic event could cause delays in completing sales, providing
services, or performing other critical functions. our corporate headquarters, a significant portion of our research and development activities, and certain other essential business operations are in the seattle, washington area, and we have other
business operations in the silicon valley area of california, both of which are seismically active regions. a catastrophic event that results in the destruction or disruption of any of our critical business or it systems could harm our ability to
conduct normal business operations. providing our customers with more services and solutions in the cloud puts a premium on the resilience of our systems and strength of our business continuity management plans, and magnifies the potential impact of
prolonged service outages on our operating results.  abrupt political change, terrorist activity, and armed conflict pose a risk of
general economic disruption in affected countries, which may increase our operating costs. these conditions also may add uncertainty to the timing and budget for technology investment decisions by our customers, and may cause supply chain
disruptions for hardware manufacturers, either of which may adversely affect our revenue. the long-term effects of climate change on the global economy or the it industry in particular are unclear. environmental regulations or changes in the supply,
demand or available sources of energy or other natural resources may affect the availability or cost of goods and services, including natural resources, necessary to run our business. changes in weather where we operate may increase the costs of
powering and cooling computer hardware we use to develop software and provide cloud-based services.
table of contents
part i  item 1a, 1b, 2
adverse economic or market conditions may harm our
business.worsening economic conditions, including inflation, recession, or other changes in economic conditions, may cause lower it spending and adversely affect our revenue. if demand for pcs, servers, and other
computing devices declines, or consumer or business spending for those products declines, our revenue will be adversely affected. substantial revenue comes from our u.s. government contracts. an extended federal government shutdown resulting from
failing to pass budget appropriations, adopt continuing funding resolutions or raise the debt ceiling, and other budgetary decisions limiting or delaying federal government spending, could reduce government it spending on our products and services
and adversely affect our revenue.  our product distribution system relies on an extensive partner and retail network. oems building
devices that run our software have also been a significant means of distribution. the impact of economic conditions on our partners, such as the bankruptcy of a major distributor, oem, or retailer, could cause sales channel disruption.
challenging economic conditions also may impair the ability of our customers to pay for products and services they have purchased. as a result,
allowances for doubtful accounts and write-offs of accounts receivable may increase.  we maintain an investment portfolio of various
holdings, types, and maturities. these investments are subject to general credit, liquidity, market, and interest rate risks, which may be exacerbated by unusual events that affect global financial markets. a significant part of our investment
portfolio comprises u.s. government securities. if global credit and equity markets decline for long periods, or if there is a downgrade of the u.s. government credit rating due to an actual or threatened default on government debt, our investment
portfolio may be adversely affected and we could determine that more of our investments have experienced an other-than-temporary decline in fair value, requiring impairment charges that could adversely affect our financial results.
item1b.unresolved staff comments
we have received no written comments regarding our periodic or current reports from the staff of the sec that were issued 180 days or more
preceding the end of our fiscal year 2016 that remain unresolved.  item2. properties
our corporate headquarters are located in redmond, washington. we have approximately 15million square feet of space located in king county,
washington that is used for engineering, sales, marketing, and operations, among other general and administrative purposes. these facilities include approximately 10million square feet of owned space situated on approximately 500 acres of land
we own at our corporate headquarters, and approximately five million square feet of space we lease. in addition, we own and lease space domestically that includes office, retail, and datacenter space.
we also own and lease facilities internationally. properties that we own include: our research and development centers in china and india; our
operations in ireland and singapore; our phone manufacturing facilities, predominantly in vietnam; and our facilities in the united kingdom. the largest leased office spaces include the following locations: finland, china, india, germany, the united
kingdom, canada, and japan. in addition to the above locations, we have various product development facilities, both domestically and internationally, as described in the research and development section of item1 of this form 10-k.
the table below shows a summary of facilities owned and leased domestically and internationally as of june30, 2016:
(square feet in millions)
location
owned
leased
total
u.s.
16.4
9.7
26.1
international
9.0
10.8
19.8
total
25.4
20.5
45.9
table of contents
part i  item 3, 4
item3.legal proceedings
while not material to the company, the company makes the following annual report of the general activities of the companys antitrust
compliance office as required by the final order and judgment in barovic v. ballmer et al, united states district court for the western district of washington (final order). for more information see
http://aka.ms/mslegalnotice2015. these annual reports will continue through 2020. during fiscal year 2016, the antitrust compliance office (a)monitored the companys compliance with the european commission decision of march24, 2004,
(2004 decision) and with the companys public undertaking to the european commission dated december16, 2009 (2009 undertaking); (b)monitored, in the manner required by the final order, employee, customer,
competitor, regulator, or other third-party complaints regarding compliance with the 2004 decision, the 2009 undertaking, or other eu or u.s. laws or regulations governing tying, bundling, and exclusive dealing contracts; and, (c)monitored, in
the manner required by the final order, the training of the companys employees regarding the companys antitrust compliance polices.in addition, the antitrust compliance officer reports to the regulatory and public policy committee
of the board at each of its regularly scheduled meetings and to the full board annually.  see note 17  contingencies of the notes
to financial statements (part ii, item8 of this form 10-k) for information regarding legal proceedings in which we are involved.
item4.mine safety disclosures  not applicable.
table of contents
part ii  item 5, 6
part ii  item5.market for registrants common equity, related stockholder matters, and issuer purchases of equity securities
market and stockholders  our
common stock is traded on the nasdaq stock market under the symbol msft. on july25, 2016, there were 106,534 registered holders of record of our common stock. the high and low common stock sales prices per share were as follows:
quarter ended
september30
december31
march31
june30
fiscalyear
fiscal year 2016
high
$48.41
$56.85
$55.64
$56.77
$56.85
low
$39.72
$43.75
$48.19
$48.04
$39.72
fiscal year 2015
high
$47.57
$50.05
$47.91
$49.54
$50.05
low
$41.05
$42.10
$40.23
$40.12
$40.12
dividends and share repurchases  see note 18  stockholders equity of the notes to financial statements (part ii, item8 of this form 10-k) for information regarding dividends and share repurchases by quarter. following are our
monthly stock repurchases for the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2016, all of which were made as part of publicly announced plans or programs:
period
totalnumberofshares
purchased
average pricepaidpershare
totalnumberofsharespurchasedaspartofpubliclyannouncedplansorprograms
approximatedollarvalueof
shares thatmayyetbe purchasedundertheplansorprograms
(inmillions)
april1,2016april30,2016
23,687,526
$
53.72
23,687,526
$9,410
may1,2016 may31,2016
11,691,472
$
50.51
11,691,472
$8,820
june1,2016june30,2016
34,576,695
$
50.23
34,576,695
$7,083
69,955,693
69,955,693
all repurchases were made using cash resources. our stock repurchases may occur through open market purchases or
pursuant to a rule 10b5-1 trading plan.  item6.selected financial data
financial highlights
(in millions, except per share data)
year ended june30,
(d)
revenue
$
85,320
(a)
$
93,580
$
86,833
$
77,849
$
73,723
gross margin
$
52,540
(a)
$
60,542
$
59,755
$
57,464
$
56,193
operating income
$
20,182
(a)(b)
$
18,161
(c)
$
27,759
$
26,764
(e)
$
21,763
(f)
net income
$
16,798
(a)(b)
$
12,193
(c)
$
22,074
$
21,863
(e)
$
16,978
(f)
diluted earnings per share
$
2.10
(a)(b)
$
1.48
(c)
$
2.63
$
2.58
(e)
$
2.00
(f)
cash dividends declared per share
$
1.44
$
1.24
$
1.12
$
0.92
$
0.80
cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments
$
113,240
$
96,526
$
85,709
$
77,022
$
63,040
total assets
$
193,694
$
174,472
(g)
$
170,675
(g)
$
140,962
(g)
$
119,388
(g)
long-term obligations
$
62,340
$
44,742
(g)
$
35,391
(g)
$
24,601
(g)
$
20,337
(g)
stockholders equity
$
71,977
$
80,083
$
89,784
$
78,944
$
66,363
table of contents
part ii  item 6, 7
(a)
reflects the impact of the net revenue deferral from windows 10 of $6.6 billion, which decreased operating income, net income, and diluted earnings per
share (eps) by $6.6 billion, $4.6 billion, and $0.58, respectively.
(b)
includes $630 million of asset impairment charges related to our phone business, and $480 million of restructuring charges associated with our phone
business restructuring plans, which together decreased operating income, net income, and diluted eps by $1.1 billion, $895 million, and $0.11, respectively.
(c)
includes $7.5 billion of goodwill and asset impairment charges related to our phone business, and $2.5 billion of integration and restructuring expenses,
primarily associated with our phone business restructuring plans, which together decreased operating income, net income, and diluted eps by $10.0 billion, $9.5 billion, and $1.15, respectively.
(d)
on april25, 2014, we acquired substantially all of nds. nds has been included in our consolidated results of operations starting on the acquisition
date.
(e)
includes a charge related to a fine imposed by the european commission in march 2013 which decreased operating income and net income by $733 million
(561 million) and diluted eps by $0.09. also includes a charge for surface rt inventory adjustments recorded in the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2013, which decreased operating income, net income, and diluted eps by $900 million, $596
million, and $0.07, respectively.
(f)
includes a goodwill impairment charge related to our previous online services division business segment (related to more personal computing under our
current segment structure) which decreased operating income and net income by $6.2 billion and diluted eps by $0.73.
(g)
reflects the impact of the adoption of the new accounting standard in fiscal year 2016 related to balance sheet classification of deferred taxes. see note
1  accounting policies of the notes to financial statements (part ii, item8 of this form 10-k) for further discussion.  item7.managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations
the following managements discussion and analysis (md&a) is intended to help the reader understand the results of operations
and financial condition of microsoft corporation. md&a is provided as a supplement to, and should be read in conjunction with, our financial statements and the accompanying notes to financial statements.
overview  microsoft is a
technology company whose mission is to empower every person and every organization on the planet to achieve more. our strategy is to build best-in-class platforms and productivity services for a mobile-first, cloud-first world. we develop, license,
and support a wide range of software products, services, and devices that deliver new opportunities, greater convenience, and enhanced value to peoples lives.  we generate revenue by licensing and supporting an array of software products, by offering a wide range of services, including cloud-based services to consumers and businesses, by designing, manufacturing, and
selling devices that integrate with our cloud-based services, and by delivering relevant online advertising to a global audience. our most significant expenses are related to compensating employees; designing, manufacturing, marketing, and selling
our products and services; datacenter costs in support of our cloud-based services; and income taxes.  much of our focus in fiscal year
2016 was toward transforming our organization to support our strategy of building best-in-class platforms and productivity services for a mobile-first, cloud-first world. we achieved product development milestones, implemented organizational
changes, and made strategic and tactical moves to support the three central ambitions that support our strategy: reinventing productivity and business processes; building the intelligent cloud platform; and creating more personal computing.
highlights from fiscal year 2016 included:
commercial cloud annualized revenue run rate* exceeded $12.1 billion.
office 365 consumer subscribers increased to 23.1 million.
table of contents
part ii  item 7
microsoft dynamics (dynamics) crm online seat additions more than doubled year-over-year.
microsoft azure (azure) revenue grew 113%, with usage of azure compute and azure sql database more than doubling year-over-year. enterprise
mobility customers nearly doubled year-over-year to over 33,000.
windows 10 is now active on more than 350million devices around the world.
xbox live monthly active users grew 33% year-over-year to 49 million.
*
commercial cloud annualized revenue run rate is calculated by multiplying revenue for the last month of the quarter by twelve for office 365 commercial,
azure, dynamics online, and other cloud properties.  in june 2016, we entered into a definitive agreement to
acquire linkedin for $196 per share in an all-cash transaction valued at $26.2 billion, inclusive of linkedins net cash (the merger agreement). we will finance the transaction primarily through the issuance of new indebtedness. the
merger agreement has been unanimously approved by the boards of directors of both microsoft and linkedin, and we expect the acquisition will close in calendar year 2016, subject to approval by linkedins shareholders, satisfaction of certain
regulatory approvals, and other customary closing conditions. the acquisition is anticipated to accelerate the growth of linkedin, as well as office 365 and dynamics.  in may 2016, we announced the sale of our entry-level feature phone business for $350 million. the transaction is expected to close in the second half of 2016, subject to regulatory approvals and other closing
conditions.  in july 2015, we announced a plan to restructure our phone business to better focus and align resources. in may 2016, we
announced plans to further streamline our smartphone hardware business. these changes in the phone business reinforce our strategy to create a vibrant windows ecosystem with a single set of experiences across our first-party device family and
original equipment manufacturer (oem) offerings. part of this strategy involves focusing our phone devices on a narrower range of customer categories and differentiating through the combination of hardware and software we are uniquely
positioned to offer. as anticipated, our change in phone strategy resulted in a reduction in units sold and associated expenses in fiscal year 2016, and this trend is expected to continue in fiscal year 2017.
industry trends  our industry is dynamic
and highly competitive, with frequent changes in both technologies and business models. each industry shift is an opportunity to conceive new products, new technologies, or new ideas that can further transform the industry and our business. at
microsoft, we push the boundaries of what is possible through a broad range of research and development activities that seek to identify and address the changing demands of customers and users, industry trends, and competitive forces.
economic conditions, challenges, and risks
the market for software, devices, and cloud-based services is dynamic and highly competitive. our competitors are developing new software and
devices, while also deploying competing cloud-based services for consumers and businesses. the devices and form factors customers prefer evolve rapidly, and influence how users access services in the cloud, and in some cases, the users choice
of which suite of cloud-based services to use. we must continue to evolve and adapt over an extended time in pace with this changing environment. the investments we are making in devices and infrastructure will continue to increase our operating
costs and may decrease our operating margins.  our success is highly dependent on our ability to attract and retain qualified employees.
we hire a mix of university and industry talent worldwide. microsoft competes for talented individuals globally by offering an exceptional working environment, broad customer reach, scale in resources, the ability to grow ones career across
many different products and businesses, and competitive compensation and benefits. aggregate demand for our software, services, and devices is correlated to global macroeconomic and geopolitical factors, which remain dynamic.
table of contents
part ii  item 7
our international operations provide a significant portion of our total revenue and expenses. many
of these revenue and expenses are denominated in currencies other than the u.s. dollar. as a result, changes in foreign exchange rates may significantly affect revenue and expenses. the strengthening of the u.s. dollar relative to certain foreign
currencies throughout fiscal year 2015, and continuing into fiscal year 2016, negatively impacted reported revenue and reduced reported expenses from our international operations. see a discussion of these factors and other risks under risk factors (part i, item1a of this form 10-k).
seasonality  our revenue historically has
fluctuated quarterly and has generally been highest in the second quarter of our fiscal year due to corporate calendar year-end spending trends in our major markets and holiday season spending by consumers.
unearned revenue  quarterly and annual revenue is impacted
by the deferral of revenue, primarily including:
revenue deferred on windows 10 licenses to reflect ratable recognition over the life of the device.
revenue deferred on bundled products and services (bundled offerings).
if our customers choose to license cloud-based versions of our products and services rather than licensing transaction-based products and services,
the associated revenue will shift from being recognized at the time of the transaction to being recognized over the subscription period or upon consumption, as applicable.  product revenue and service and other revenue  due to the growth in our cloud-based solutions,
service revenue exceeded 10% of total revenue for the first time in fiscal year 2016. as a result, we have separately disclosed product revenue and service and other revenue on our consolidated income statements.
product revenue includes sales from operating systems; cross-device productivity applications; server applications; business solution applications;
desktop and server management tools; software development tools; video games; hardware such as pcs, tablets, gaming and entertainment consoles, phones, other intelligent devices, and related accessories; and training and certification of computer
system integrators and developers.  service and other revenue includes sales from cloud-based solutions that provide customers with
software, services, platforms, and content such as office 365, azure, dynamics crm online, and xbox live; solution support; and consulting services. service and other revenue also includes sales from online advertising.
reportable segments  the segment amounts
included in md&a are presented on a basis consistent with our internal management reporting. segment information appearing in note 21  segment information and geographic data of the notes to financial statements (part ii, item8 of
this form 10-k) is also presented on this basis. all differences between our internal management reporting basis and accounting principles generally accepted in the united states (u.s. gaap), along with certain corporate-level and other
activity, are included in corporate and other.  in june 2015, we announced a change in organizational structure to align to our
strategic direction as a productivity and platform company. during the first quarter of fiscal year 2016, our chief operating decision maker, who is also our chief executive officer, requested changes in the information that he regularly reviews for
purposes of allocating resources and assessing performance. as a result, beginning in fiscal year 2016, we report our financial performance based on our new segments, productivity and business processes, intelligent cloud, and more personal
computing, and analyze operating income as the measure of segment profitability. we have recast certain previously reported amounts to conform to the way we internally manage and monitor segment performance.
table of contents
part ii  item 7
we expect to report the financial performance of linkedin as part of our productivity and business
processes segment.  additional information on our reportable segments is contained in note 21  segment information and geographic
data of the notes to financial statements (part ii, item8 of this form 10-k).  summary results of operations
(inmillions,exceptpercentagesandpershareamounts)
percentagechange2016versus2015
percentagechange2015versus2014
revenue
$
85,320
$
93,580
$
86,833
(9)%
8%
gross margin
$
52,540
$
60,542
$
59,755
(13)%
1%
operating income
$
20,182
$
18,161
$
27,759
11%
(35)%
diluted earnings per share
$
2.10
$
1.48
$
2.63
42%
(44)%
fiscal year 2016 compared with fiscal year 2015  revenue decreased $8.3 billion or 9%, primarily due to the impact of the net revenue deferral from windows 10 of $6.6 billion and an unfavorable foreign currency impact of approximately $3.8 billion or 4%. windows
10 revenue is primarily recognized at the time of billing in the more personal computing segment, and the deferral and subsequent recognition of revenue is reflected in corporate and other. more personal computing revenue decreased, mainly due to
lower revenue from devices and windows, offset in part by higher revenue from search advertising and gaming. intelligent cloud revenue increased, primarily due to higher revenue from server products and cloud services and enterprise services.
productivity and business processes revenue increased slightly, driven by an increase in office and dynamics revenue.  operating income
increased $2.0 billion or 11%, primarily due to a decrease in impairment, integration, and restructuring expenses and sales and marketing expenses, offset in part by lower gross margin. gross margin decreased $8.0 billion or 13%, driven by the
decline in revenue as discussed above, and included an unfavorable foreign currency impact of approximately $3.3 billion or 5%. productivity and business processes and more personal computing gross margin decreased, offset in part by higher gross
margin from intelligent cloud.  key changes in expenses were:
cost of revenue decreased $258 million or 1%, mainly due to a reduction in phone sales, driven by the change in strategy for the phone business, offset in
part by growth in commercial cloud and search advertising.
impairment, integration, and restructuring expenses decreased $8.9 billion, primarily driven by prior year goodwill and asset impairment charges related to
our phone business and restructuring charges associated with our phone business restructuring plans.
sales and marketing expenses decreased $1.0 billion or 6%, driven by a reduction in phone expenses and a favorable foreign currency impact of approximately
2%.  diluted earnings per share (eps) was $2.10 for fiscal year 2016. current year diluted eps was
negatively impacted by the net revenue deferral from windows 10 and impairment, integration, and restructuring expenses, which resulted in a decrease to diluted eps of $0.69, and favorably impacted by the adoption of new accounting guidance related
to stock-based compensation, which resulted in an increase to diluted eps of $0.05. diluted eps was $1.48 for fiscal year 2015. prior year diluted eps was negatively impacted by impairment, integration, and restructuring expenses, which resulted in
a decrease to diluted eps of $1.15.
table of contents
part ii  item 7
fiscal year 2015 compared with fiscal year 2014
revenue increased $6.7 billion or 8%, primarily due to higher revenue from more personal computing and intelligent cloud. more personal computing
revenue increased, primarily due to higher revenue from devices, search advertising and gaming, offset in part by a decline in windows revenue. intelligent cloud revenue increased, primarily due to higher revenue from server products and cloud
services. revenue included an unfavorable foreign currency impact of approximately 2%.  operating income decreased $9.6 billion or 35%,
primarily due to impairment, integration, and restructuring expenses in fiscal year 2015, as well as increased research and development expenses, offset in part by higher gross margin. gross margin increased $787 million or 1%, driven by our
intelligent cloud, offset in part by a reduction in gross margin from productivity and business processes. key changes in expenses were:
cost of revenue increased $6.0 billion or 22%, mainly due to phone sales, as well as increasing costs in support of our commercial cloud, including $396
million of higher datacenter expenses.
impairment, integration, and restructuring expenses were $10.0 billion in fiscal year 2015, reflecting goodwill and asset impairment charges of $7.5 billion
related to our phone business, and $2.5 billion of integration and restructuring expenses, primarily driven by costs associated with our phone business restructuring plans.
research and development expenses increased $665 million or 6%, mainly due to increased investment in new products and services, including phone expenses,
offset in part by reduced headcount-related expenses.  diluted eps was $1.48 for fiscal year 2015. diluted eps was
negatively impacted by impairment, integration, and restructuring expenses, which decreased diluted eps by $1.15.  segment results of
operations
(in millions, except percentages)
percentagechange2016versus2015
percentagechange2015versus2014
revenue
productivity and business processes
$
26,487
$
26,430
$
26,976
0%
(2)%
intelligent cloud
25,042
23,715
21,735
6%
9%
more personal computing
40,460
43,160
38,460
(6)%
12%
corporate and other
(6,669
)
(338
)
*
*
total revenue
$
85,320
$
93,580
$
86,833
(9)%
8%
operating income (loss)
productivity and business processes
$
12,461
$
13,359
$
14,173
(7)%
(6)%
intelligent cloud
9,358
9,871
8,446
(5)%
17%
more personal computing
6,142
4,667
5,605
32%
(17)%
corporate and other
(7,779
)
(9,736
)
(465
)
*
*
total operating income
$
20,182
$
18,161
$
27,759
11%
(35)%
*
not meaningful
table of contents
part ii  item 7
reportable segments  fiscal year 2016 compared with fiscal year 2015  productivity and business processes
productivity and business processes revenue increased slightly, primarily due to an increase in office and dynamics revenue. revenue included an
unfavorable foreign currency impact of approximately 6%.
office commercial revenue increased $135 million or 1%, driven by higher revenue from office 365 commercial, mainly due to growth in subscribers, offset by
lower transactional license volume, reflecting a continued shift to office 365 commercial and a decline in the business pc market. revenue included an unfavorable foreign currency impact of approximately 6%.
office consumer revenue decreased $69 million or 2%, driven by a decline in the consumer pc market, offset in part by higher revenue from office 365 consumer,
mainly due to growth in subscribers. revenue included an unfavorable foreign currency impact of approximately 4%.
dynamics revenue increased 4%, mainly due to higher revenue from dynamics crm online, driven by seat growth. revenue included an unfavorable foreign currency
impact of approximately 6%.  productivity and business processes operating income decreased $898 million or 7%, driven
by lower gross margin. gross margin decreased $970 million or 4%, primarily due to higher cost of revenue. gross margin included an unfavorable foreign currency impact of approximately 6%. cost of revenue increased $1.0 billion or 26%, primarily due
to an increased mix of cloud offerings. operating expenses decreased $72 million or 1%, driven by lower sales and marketing expenses. sales and marketing expenses decreased $82 million or 2%, mainly due to a reduction in headcount-related expenses
and lower fees paid to third-party enterprise software advisors.  intelligent cloud
intelligent cloud revenue increased $1.3 billion or 6%, primarily due to higher server products and cloud services revenue and enterprise services
revenue. revenue included an unfavorable foreign currency impact of approximately 5%.
server products and cloud services revenue grew $686 million or 4%, driven by revenue growth from azure of 113%, offset in part by a decline in transactional
revenue from our on-premises server products. revenue included an unfavorable foreign currency impact of approximately 5%.
enterprise services revenue grew $536 million or 11%, mainly due to growth in premier support services. revenue included an unfavorable foreign currency
impact of approximately 5%.  intelligent cloud operating income decreased $513 million or 5%, primarily due to higher
operating expenses, offset in part by higher gross margin. operating expenses increased $989 million or 12%, mainly due to higher research and development expenses and sales and marketing expenses. research and development expenses increased $567
million or 21% and sales and marketing expenses increased $347 million or 9%, driven by increased strategic investments and acquisitions to drive cloud sales capacity and innovation. gross margin increased $476 million or 3%, driven by revenue
growth, offset in part by higher cost of revenue. gross margin included an unfavorable foreign currency impact of approximately 5%. cost of revenue increased $851 million or 15%, primarily driven by an increased mix of cloud services.
more personal computing  more personal
computing revenue decreased $2.7 billion or 6%, mainly due to lower revenue from devices and windows, offset in part by higher revenue from search advertising and gaming. revenue included an unfavorable foreign currency impact of approximately 2%.
devices revenue decreased $3.7 billion or 32%, mainly due to lower revenue from phones, driven by the change in strategy for the phone business, offset in
part by higher microsoft surface (surface) revenue.
table of contents
part ii  item 7
phone revenue decreased $4.2 billion or 56%, as we sold 13.8million microsoft lumia (lumia) phones and 75.5million other phones in fiscal year 2016, compared with
36.8million and 126.8million sold, respectively, in fiscal year 2015. surface revenue increased $486 million or 13%, primarily driven by the release of surface pro 4 and surface book in the second quarter of fiscal year 2016, as well as
the release of surface 3 in the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2015, offset in part by a decline in revenue from surface pro 3. devices revenue included an unfavorable foreign currency impact of approximately 3%.
windows revenue decreased $871 million or 5%, mainly due to lower revenue from patent licensing, windows oem licensing (windows oem), and windows
phone licensing. patent licensing revenue decreased 27%, due to a decline in license revenue per unit and licensed units. windows oem revenue decreased 1%. windows oem pro revenue declined 6%, driven by a decline in the business pc market. windows
oem non-pro revenue increased 7%, outperforming the consumer pc market, driven by a higher mix of premium licenses sold. windows phone licensing revenue decreased 64%, driven by the recognition of deferred revenue in fiscal year 2015 from windows
phone 8. windows revenue included an unfavorable foreign currency impact of approximately 2%.
search advertising revenue increased $1.7 billion or 46%. search advertising revenue, excluding traffic acquisition costs, increased 17%, primarily driven by
growth in bing, due to higher revenue per search and search volume. search advertising revenue included an unfavorable foreign currency impact of approximately 2%.
gaming revenue increased $132 million or 1%, primarily due to higher revenue from xbox live and video games, offset in part by lower xbox hardware revenue.
xbox live revenue increased 17%, driven by higher revenue per transaction and volume of transactions. video games revenue grew 34%, driven by the launch of halo 5 and sales of minecraft. we acquired mojang ab (mojang), the swedish video
game developer of the minecraft gaming franchise, in november 2014. xbox hardware revenue decreased 16%, mainly due to lower prices of xbox one consoles sold and a decline in xbox 360 console volume, offset in part by higher xbox one console volume.
gaming revenue included an unfavorable foreign currency impact of approximately 4%.  more personal computing operating
income increased $1.5 billion or 32%, primarily due to lower operating expenses, offset in part by lower gross margin. operating expenses decreased $2.0 billion or 13%, mainly due to lower sales and marketing expenses and research and development
expenses. sales and marketing expenses decreased $1.3 billion or 19% and research and development expenses decreased $676 million or 10%, driven by a reduction in phone expenses. gross margin decreased $564 million or 3%, reflecting lower revenue,
offset in part by a reduction in cost of revenue. gross margin included an unfavorable foreign currency impact of approximately 5%. cost of revenue decreased $2.1 billion or 9%, primarily driven by a reduction in phone sales, offset in part by
higher search advertising cost of revenue.  fiscal year 2015 compared with fiscal year 2014
productivity and business processes
productivity and business processes revenue decreased $546 million or 2%, mainly due to a decline in revenue from office, offset in part by growth
in revenue from dynamics. revenue included an unfavorable foreign currency impact of approximately 2%.
office consumer revenue decreased $624 million or 17%, driven by declines in the japan pc market, where office is predominantly pre-installed on new pcs,
offset in part by subscriber growth of office 365 consumer.
office commercial revenue decreased $152 million or 1%, driven by lower transactional license volume, reflecting a decline in the business pc market following
windows xp end of support in the prior year, and declines in japan, offset in part by subscriber growth and higher premium mix of office 365 commercial.
dynamics revenue grew 12%, mainly due to higher revenue from dynamics crm online and dynamics erp products. dynamics users increased, with 30% growth in
number of dynamics paid seats, and we ended fiscal year 2015 with over eight million paid seats.
table of contents
part ii  item 7
productivity and business processes operating income decreased $814 million or 6%, driven by lower
gross margin, offset in part by a reduction in operating expenses. gross margin decreased $1.0 billion or 4%, primarily due to the decline in office consumer revenue. gross margin included an unfavorable foreign currency impact of approximately 2%.
cost of revenue increased $492 million or 15%, primarily due to higher cloud infrastructure expenses, reflecting increased datacenter capacity to serve our office 365 offerings. operating expenses decreased $224 million or 2%. sales and marketing
and general and administrative expenses decreased $258 million and $125 million, respectively, mainly due to lower headcount-related expenses. research and development expenses increased $159 million or 6%, mainly due to increased investment in new
products and services.  intelligent cloud  intelligent cloud revenue increased $2.0 billion or 9%, mainly due to higher server products and services revenue, as well as higher enterprise services revenue. revenue included an unfavorable foreign currency
impact of approximately 2%.
server products and cloud services revenue grew $1.6 billion or 9%, primarily driven by higher premium mix of microsoft sql server, windows server, and system
center, as well as continued revenue growth from azure.
enterprise services revenue grew $325 million or 7%, mainly due to growth in premier support services.
intelligent cloud operating income increased $1.4 billion or 17%, primarily due to higher gross margin, offset in part by higher operating
expenses. gross margin increased $1.6 billion or 10%, driven by revenue growth from our server products and services. gross margin included an unfavorable foreign currency impact of approximately 2%. cost of revenue increased $404 million or 7%,
mainly due to higher cloud infrastructure expenses, reflecting increased datacenter capacity for our azure services. operating expenses increased $151 million or 2%, driven by higher research and development expenses. research and development
expenses increased $160 million or 6%, mainly due to increased investment in new products and services.  more personal computing
more personal computing revenue increased $4.7 billion or 12%, mainly due to growth in devices, search advertising, and gaming revenue, offset in
part by a decline in revenue from windows.
devices revenue increased $7.0 billion or 152%, mainly due to a full year of phone sales and higher surface revenue. devices revenue included an unfavorable
foreign currency impact of approximately 5%. phones revenue increased $5.5 billion, as we sold 36.8million lumia phones and 126.8million other phones in fiscal year 2015, compared with 5.8million and 30.3million sold,
respectively, in fiscal year 2014 following the acquisition of nokia corporations (nokia) devices and services business (nds). we acquired nds in the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2014. surface revenue increased 65% to
$3.6 billion, primarily due to surface pro 3 units sold. surface pro 3 was released in june 2014.
search advertising revenue increased $651 million or 22%, primarily driven by growth in bing, due to higher revenue per search and search volume.
gaming revenue increased $463 million or 5%, mainly due to growth in xbox live and video games revenue, offset in part by a decrease in xbox hardware revenue
and third-party video game royalties. we sold 12.1million xbox consoles in fiscal year 2015 compared with 11.7million consoles in fiscal year 2014. xbox live revenue increased $500 million, driven by increased xbox live users and revenue
per user. video games revenue increased $265 million, mainly due to sales of minecraft following the acquisition of mojang in november 2014, and new xbox titles released in the current year.
windows revenue decreased $3.6 billion or 16%, mainly due to lower revenue from windows oem and windows phone. windows oem revenue decreased $1.9 billion or
15%, primarily due to declines of 15% in oem pro revenue and 16% in oem non-pro revenue. windows oem pro revenue decreased, primarily due to benefits realized from the expiration of support for windows xp in the prior year, and declines in the
table of contents
part ii  item 7
business pc market. windows oem non-pro revenue declined, mainly due to an increased mix of opening price point devices sold, and declines in the consumer pc market. windows phone revenue,
including related patent licensing, decreased $1.4 billion or 55%, primarily due to prior year revenue associated with our joint strategic initiatives with nokia that terminated when we acquired nds.
more personal computing operating income decreased $938 million or 17%, primarily due to higher operating expenses, as well as a reduction in gross
margin. gross margin decreased $364 million or 2%, reflecting a reduction in windows gross margin, offset in part by an increase in devices gross margin. cost of revenue increased $5.1 billion or 28%, driven by higher phones cost of revenue, as well
as higher xbox live and search infrastructure costs, offset in part by a reduction in windows phone cost of revenue. phones cost of revenue increased $4.8 billion, reflecting a full year of phone sales in fiscal year 2015. windows phone cost of
revenue decreased $897 million, driven by prior year costs associated with our joint strategic initiatives with nokia that terminated when we acquired nds. operating expenses increased $574 million or 4%, driven by a full year of nds expenses.
research and development expenses increased $346 million or 5%, mainly due to increased investment in new product and services, including higher phone expenses, offset in part by reduced headcount-related expenses. sales and marketing expenses
increased $211 million or 3%, primarily due to higher phone expenses, offset in part by a decline in advertising and other marketing program costs.
corporate and other  corporate and other
revenue primarily comprises certain revenue deferrals, including those related to windows 10, bundled offerings, and video games. corporate and other operating income (loss) primarily comprises revenue deferrals and corporate-level activity not
specifically allocated to a segment, including impairment, integration, and restructuring expenses.  fiscal year 2016 compared with fiscal year 2015
corporate and other revenue decreased $6.9 billion, primarily due to the impact of the net revenue deferral from windows 10. during
fiscal year 2016, we deferred net revenue from windows 10 of $6.6 billion. during fiscal year 2015, we recognized a net $303 million of previously deferred revenue related to bundled offerings.
corporate and other operating loss decreased $2.0 billion, primarily due to an $8.9 billion reduction in impairment, integration, and restructuring
expenses, driven by prior year goodwill and asset impairment charges related to our phone business, offset in part by lower revenue.  fiscal year
2015 compared with fiscal year 2014  corporate and other revenue increased $613 million, primarily due to the timing of net revenue
deferrals compared to the prior year. during fiscal year 2015, we recognized a net $303 million of previously deferred revenue related to bundled offerings. during fiscal year 2014, we deferred a net $349 million of revenue related to bundled
offerings.  corporate and other operating loss increased $9.3 billion, primarily due to higher impairment, integration, and
restructuring expenses, offset in part by increased revenue.  operating expenses
research and development
(in millions, except percentages)
percentage change2016 versus2015
percentage change2015 versus2014
research and development
$
11,988
$
12,046
$
11,381
0%
6%
as a percent of revenue
14%
13%
13%
1ppt
0ppt
table of contents
part ii  item 7
research and development expenses include payroll, employee benefits, stock-based compensation
expense, and other headcount-related expenses associated with product development. research and development expenses also include third-party development and programming costs, localization costs incurred to translate software for international
markets, and the amortization of purchased software code.  fiscal year 2016 compared with fiscal year 2015
research and development expenses decreased $58 million, primarily due to a reduction in phone expenses, driven by the change in strategy for the
phone business, offset in part by increased strategic investments and acquisitions to drive cloud innovation.  fiscal year 2015 compared with fiscal
year 2014  research and development expenses increased $665 million or 6%, mainly due to increased investment in new products and
services, including $739 million higher phone expenses, offset in part by reduced headcount-related expenses.  sales and marketing
(in millions, except percentages)
percentage change2016 versus2015
percentage change2015 versus2014
sales and marketing
$
14,697
$
15,713
$
15,811
(6)%
(1)%
as a percent of revenue
17%
17%
18%
0ppt
(1)ppt
sales and marketing expenses include payroll, employee benefits, stock-based compensation expense, and other
headcount-related expenses associated with sales and marketing personnel and the costs of advertising, promotions, trade shows, seminars, and other programs.  fiscal year 2016 compared with fiscal year 2015  sales and marketing expenses decreased $1.0
billion or 6%, primarily due to a reduction in phone expenses, driven by the change in strategy for the phone business. expenses included a favorable foreign currency impact of approximately 2%.
fiscal year 2015 compared with fiscal year 2014  sales and marketing expenses decreased $98 million or 1%, primarily due to a decline in advertising and marketing programs costs and a reduction in headcount-related expenses, offset in part by an increase in phone
expenses. expenses included a favorable foreign currency impact of approximately 4%.  general and administrative
(in millions, except percentages)
percentage change2016 versus2015
percentage change2015 versus2014
general and administrative
$
4,563
$
4,611
$
4,677
(1)%
(1)%
as a percent of revenue
5%
5%
5%
0ppt
0ppt
general and administrative expenses include payroll, employee benefits, stock-based compensation expense, severance
expense, and other headcount-related expenses associated with finance, legal, facilities, certain human resources and other administrative personnel, certain taxes, and legal and other administrative fees.
table of contents
part ii  item 7
fiscal year 2016 compared with fiscal year 2015
general and administrative expenses decreased $48 million or 1%, primarily due to a reduction in employee-related expenses, offset in part by
increased investments in infrastructure supporting our business transformation. expenses included a favorable foreign currency impact of approximately 2%.  fiscal year 2015 compared with fiscal year 2014  general and administrative expenses were comparable to the
prior year.  impairment, integration, and restructuring expenses
impairment, integration, and restructuring expenses include costs associated with the impairment of goodwill and intangible assets related to our
phone business, employee severance expenses and costs associated with the consolidation of facilities and manufacturing operations related to restructuring activities, and systems consolidation and other business integration expenses associated with
our acquisition of nds.  fiscal year 2016 compared with fiscal year 2015
impairment, integration, and restructuring expenses were $1.1 billion for fiscal year 2016, compared to $10.0 billion for fiscal year 2015.
during fiscal year 2016, we recorded $630 million of asset impairment charges related to our phone business. we also recorded $480
million of restructuring charges, including employee severance expenses and contract termination costs, primarily related to our previously announced phone business restructuring plans.
during fiscal year 2015, we recognized impairment charges of $7.5 billion related to our phone business. our annual goodwill impairment test as of
may1, 2015 indicated that the carrying value of our previous phone hardware reporting unit goodwill exceeded its estimated fair value. accordingly, we recorded a goodwill impairment charge of $5.1 billion, reducing our phone hardware reporting
unit goodwill from $5.4 billion to $116 million, net of foreign currency remeasurements, as well as an impairment charge of $2.2 billion related to the write-down of our phone hardware reporting unit intangible assets. all remaining goodwill and
intangible assets are included in our devices reporting unit, within more personal computing under our current segment structure. restructuring charges were $2.1 billion, including employee severance expenses and the write-down of certain assets in
connection with our restructuring activities. integration expenses associated with the acquisition of nds were $435 million in fiscal year 2015.
fiscal year 2015 compared with fiscal year 2014  impairment, integration, and restructuring expenses were $10.0 billion for fiscal year 2015, compared to $127 million for fiscal year 2014. impairment, integration, and restructuring expenses for fiscal year 2015
are comprised mainly of impairment and restructuring charges of $7.5 billion and $2.1 billion, respectively, related to our phone business. integration expenses increased $308 million, due to a full-year of integration activities in fiscal year 2015
associated with the acquisition of nds.
table of contents
part ii  item 7
other income (expense), net  the components of other income (expense), net were as follows:
(in millions)
year ended june30,
dividends and interest income
$
$
$
interest expense
(1,243
)
(781
)
(597
)
net recognized gains on investments
net losses on derivatives
(443
)
(423
)
(328
)
net gains (losses) on foreign currency remeasurements
(121
)
(165
)
other
(195
)
(267
)
(169
)
total
$
(431
)
$
$
we use derivative instruments to: manage risks related to foreign currencies, equity prices, interest rates, and
credit; enhance investment returns; and facilitate portfolio diversification. gains and losses from changes in fair values of derivatives that are not designated as hedges are primarily recognized in other income (expense), net. other than those
derivatives entered into for investment purposes, such as commodity contracts, the gains (losses) are generally economically offset by unrealized gains (losses) in the underlying available-for-sale securities and gains (losses) on certain balance
sheet amounts from foreign exchange rate changes.  fiscal year 2016 compared with fiscal year 2015
dividends and interest income increased due to higher portfolio balances and slightly higher yields on fixed-income securities. interest expense
increased due to higher outstanding long-term debt. net recognized gains on investments decreased primarily due to higher other-than-temporary impairments and lower gains on sales of fixed-income securities, offset in part by higher gains on sales
of equity securities. other-than-temporary impairments were $322 million in fiscal year 2016, compared with $183 million in fiscal year 2015. net losses on derivatives increased due to higher losses on currency and equity contracts and lower gains
on interest rate contracts in the current period as compared to the prior period, offset in part by lower losses on commodity contracts. for fiscal year 2016, other reflects recognized losses from divestitures and certain joint ventures.
fiscal year 2015 compared with fiscal year 2014  dividends and interest income decreased due to lower yields on fixed-income securities, offset in part by higher portfolio balances. interest expense increased due to higher outstanding long-term debt. net
recognized gains on investments increased primarily due to higher gains on sales of equity securities, offset in part by higher other-than-temporary impairments. other-than-temporary impairments were $183 million in fiscal year 2015, compared with
$106 million in fiscal year 2014. net losses on derivatives increased due to losses on commodity contracts in fiscal year 2015 as compared to gains in fiscal year 2014, offset in part by lower losses on currency and equity contracts. for fiscal year
2015, other reflects recognized losses from certain joint ventures and divestitures.  income taxes
fiscal year 2016 compared with fiscal year 2015  our effective tax rate for fiscal years 2016 and 2015 was 15% and 34%, respectively.our effective tax rate was lower than the u.s. federal statutory rate primarily due to earnings taxed at lower rates in
foreign jurisdictions resulting from producing and distributing our products and services through our foreign regional operations centers in ireland, singapore, and puerto rico.
the decrease in our effective tax rate for fiscal year 2016 compared to fiscal year 2015 was primarily due to changes in the mix of our income
before income taxes between the u.s. and foreign countries including the impact of net
table of contents
part ii  item 7
revenue deferrals related to sales of windows 10, tax benefits from the adoption of the new accounting guidance relating to stock-based compensation, and distributions from foreign affiliates.
the fiscal year 2015 effective tax rate included the tax impact of losses in foreign jurisdictions for which we may not realize a tax benefit, primarily as a result of impairment and restructuring charges.
the mix of income before income taxes between the u.s. and foreign countries impacted our effective tax rate as a result of the geographic
distribution of, and customer demand for, our products and services. we supply our windows pc operating system to customers through our u.s. regional operating center, while we supply the microsoft office system and our server products and tools to
customers through our foreign regional operations centers. in fiscal year 2016, our u.s. loss before income taxes was $325 million and our foreign income before income taxes was $20.1 billion. net revenue deferrals related to sales of windows 10
negatively impacted our fiscal year 2016 u.s. loss before income taxes by $6.0 billion and foreign income before income taxes by $588 million. in fiscal year 2015, our u.s. income before income taxes was $7.4 billion and our foreign income before
income taxes was $11.1 billion. impairment, integration, and restructuring expense relating to our phone business decreased our fiscal year 2015 u.s income before income taxes by $1.1 billion and foreign income before income taxes by
$8.9billion.  on july27, 2015, the u.s. tax court issued an opinion in altera corp. v. commissioner related to the treatment
of stock-based compensation expense in an intercompany cost-sharing arrangement. the irss decision to appeal on february19, 2016 prolongs the uncertainty regarding the ultimate outcome of the altera case, and we do not expect to adjust
our consolidated financial statements until there is a final resolution of this case.  tax contingencies and other income tax
liabilities were $11.8 billion and $12.1 billion as of june30, 2016 and 2015, respectively, and are included in other long-term liabilities. this decrease relates primarily to tax credits available for carryover and a partial settlement of the
irs audit for tax years 2007 to 2009, offset by increases relating to intercompany transfer pricing.  while we settled a portion of the
irs audit for tax years 2004 to 2006 during the third quarter of fiscal year 2011, and settled a portion of the irs audit for tax years 2007 to 2009 during the first quarter of fiscal year 2016, we remain under audit for those years. in february
2012, the irs withdrew its 2011 revenue agents report for tax years 2004 to 2006 and reopened the audit phase of the examination. as of june30, 2016, the primary unresolved issue relates to transfer pricing, which could have a significant
impact on our consolidated financial statements if not resolved favorably. we believe our allowances for income tax contingencies are adequate. we have not received a proposed assessment for the unresolved issues and do not expect a final resolution
of these issues in the next 12 months.based on the information currently available, we do not anticipate a significant increase or decrease to our tax contingencies for these issues within the next 12 months. we also continue to be subject to
examination by the irs for tax years 2010 to 2016.  we are subject to income tax in many jurisdictions outside the u.s. our operations
in certain jurisdictions remain subject to examination for tax years 1996 to 2016, some of which are currently under audit by local tax authorities. the resolutions of these audits are not expected to be material to our consolidated financial
statements.  fiscal year 2015 compared with fiscal year 2014  our effective tax rate for fiscal years 2015 and 2014 was 34% and 21%, respectively. the fiscal year 2015 effective rate increased by 13%, primarily due to goodwill and asset impairments and restructuring charges
recorded in fiscal year 2015, most of which did not generate a tax benefit. our effective tax rate was lower than the u.s. federal statutory rate primarily due to foreign earnings taxed at lower rates resulting from producing and distributing our
products and services through our foreign regional operations centers in ireland, singapore, and puerto rico. in fiscal year 2015, this reduction was mostly offset by losses in foreign jurisdictions for which we may not realize a tax benefit,
primarily as a result of impairment and restructuring charges.  changes in the mix of income before income taxes between the u.s. and
foreign countries impacted our effective tax rate as a result of the geographic distribution of, and customer demand for, our products and services. we supply our windows pc operating system to customers through our u.s. regional operating center,
while we supply
table of contents
part ii  item 7
the microsoft office system and our server products and tools to customers through our foreign regional operations centers. in fiscal years 2015 and 2014, our u.s. income before income taxes was
$7.4 billion and $7.1 billion, respectively, and comprised 40% and 26%, respectively, of our income before income taxes. in fiscal years 2015 and 2014, our foreign income before income taxes was $11.1 billion and $20.7 billion, respectively, and
comprised 60% and 74%, respectively, of our income before income taxes.  financial condition
cash, cash equivalents, and investments
cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments totaled $113.2 billion as of june30, 2016, compared with $96.5 billion as of june30,
2015. equity and other investments were $10.4 billion as of june30, 2016, compared with $12.1 billion as of june30, 2015. our short-term investments are primarily intended to facilitate liquidity and for capital preservation. they
consist predominantly of highly liquid investment-grade fixed-income securities, diversified among industries and individual issuers. the investments are predominantly u.s. dollar-denominated securities, but also include foreign currency-denominated
securities in order to diversify risk. our fixed-income investments are exposed to interest rate risk and credit risk. the credit risk and average maturity of our fixed-income portfolio are managed to achieve economic returns that correlate to
certain fixed-income indices. the settlement risk related to these investments is insignificant given that the short-term investments held are primarily highly liquid investment-grade fixed-income securities.
of the cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments as of june30, 2016, $108.9 billion was held by our foreign subsidiaries and would
be subject to material repatriation tax effects. the amount of cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments held by foreign subsidiaries subject to other restrictions on the free flow of funds (primarily currency and other local regulatory)
was $2.4 billion. as of june30, 2016, approximately 83% of the cash equivalents and short-term investments held by our foreign subsidiaries were invested in u.s. government and agency securities, approximately 4% were invested in corporate
notes and bonds of u.s. companies, and approximately 5% were invested in u.s. mortgage- and asset-backed securities, all of which are denominated in u.s. dollars. the remaining cash equivalents and short-term investments held by our foreign
subsidiaries were invested in foreign securities.  securities lending  we lend certain fixed-income and equity securities to increase investment returns. the loaned securities continue to be carried as investments on our consolidated balance sheets. cash and/or security interests are
received as collateral for the loaned securities with the amount determined based upon the underlying security lent and the creditworthiness of the borrower. collateral received is recorded as an asset with a corresponding liability. our securities
lending payable balance was $294 million as of june30, 2016. our average and maximum securities lending payable balances for fiscal year 2016 were $361 million and $1.2 billion, respectively. intra-year variances in the amount of securities
loaned are mainly due to fluctuations in the demand for the securities.  valuation
in general, and where applicable, we use quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities to determine the fair value of our
financial instruments. this pricing methodology applies to our level 1 investments, such as exchange-traded mutual funds, domestic and international equities, and u.s. government securities. if quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or
liabilities are not available to determine fair value, then we use quoted prices for similar assets and liabilities or inputs other than the quoted prices that are observable either directly or indirectly. this pricing methodology applies to our
level 2 investments such as corporate notes and bonds, common and preferred stock, foreign government bonds, mortgage- and asset-backed securities, u.s. government and agency securities, and certificates of deposit. level 3 investments are valued
using internally developed models with unobservable inputs. assets and liabilities measured at fair value on a recurring basis using unobservable inputs are an immaterial portion of our portfolio.
table of contents
part ii  item 7
a majority of our investments are priced by pricing vendors and are generally level 1 or level 2
investments as these vendors either provide a quoted market price in an active market or use observable inputs for their pricing without applying significant adjustments. broker pricing is used mainly when a quoted price is not available, the
investment is not priced by our pricing vendors, or when a broker price is more reflective of fair values in the market in which the investment trades. our broker-priced investments are generally classified as level 2 investments because the broker
prices these investments based on similar assets without applying significant adjustments. in addition, all of our broker-priced investments have a sufficient level of trading volume to demonstrate that the fair values used are appropriate for these
investments. our fair value processes include controls that are designed to ensure appropriate fair values are recorded. these controls include model validation, review of key model inputs, analysis of period-over-period fluctuations, and
independent recalculation of prices where appropriate.  cash flows  fiscal year 2016 compared with fiscal year 2015  cash flows from operations increased $3.7
billion to $33.3 billion during the fiscal year, mainly due to lower operating expenditures and a reduction in materials and production costs, offset in part by a decrease in cash received from customers. cash used in financing decreased $1.3
billion to $8.4 billion, mainly due to a $4.6 billion increase in proceeds from issuances of debt, net of repayments, offset in part by a $1.5 billion increase in cash used for common stock repurchases and a $1.1 billion increase in dividends paid.
cash used in investing increased $949 million to $24.0 billion, mainly due to a $2.4 billion increase in cash used for additions to property and equipment and a $1.5 billion increase in cash used for net investment purchases, sales, and maturities,
offset in part by a $2.3 billion decrease in cash used for acquisitions of companies, net of cash acquired, and purchases of intangibles and other assets.  fiscal year 2015 compared with fiscal year 2014  cash flows from operations decreased $2.8
billion to $29.7 billion, mainly due to an increase in materials and production costs in support of sales growth as well as payments related to restructuring charges and other changes in working capital, offset in part by increases in cash received
from customers. cash used in financing increased $1.0 billion to $9.7 billion, mainly due to a $7.1 billion increase in cash used for common stock repurchases, offset in part by a $6.7 billion increase in proceeds from issuances of debt, net of
repayments. cash used in investing increased $4.2 billion to $23.0 billion, mainly due to a $5.5 billion increase in cash used for net investment purchases, sales, and maturities, partially offset by a $2.2 billion decrease in cash used for
acquisitions of companies, net of cash acquired, and purchases of intangible and other assets.  debt
we issued debt to take advantage of favorable pricing and liquidity in the debt markets, reflecting our credit rating and the low interest rate
environment. the proceeds of these issuances were or will be used for general corporate purposes, which may include, among other things, funding for working capital, capital expenditures, repurchases of capital stock, acquisitions, and repayment of
existing debt. see note 12  debt of the notes to financial statements (part ii, item8 of this form 10-k) for further discussion.
unearned revenue  unearned revenue as of
june30, 2016 was comprised mainly of unearned revenue from volume licensing programs. unearned revenue from volume licensing programs represents customer billings for multi-year licensing arrangements paid for either at inception of the
agreement or annually at the beginning of each coverage period and accounted for as subscriptions with revenue recognized ratably over the coverage period. unearned revenue as of june30, 2016 also included payments for: windows 10 licenses;
post-delivery support and consulting services to be performed in the future; office 365 subscriptions; xbox live subscriptions; microsoft dynamics business solutions products; skype prepaid credits and subscriptions; bundled offerings; and other
offerings for which we have been paid in advance and earn the revenue when we provide the service or software, or otherwise meet the revenue recognition criteria.
table of contents
part ii  item 7
the following table outlines the expected future recognition of unearned revenue as of
june30, 2016:
(in millions)
three months ending,
september30, 2016
$
10,194
december31, 2016
8,348
march31, 2017
5,868
june30, 2017
3,058
thereafter
6,441
total
$
33,909
share repurchases  on september16, 2013, our board of directors approved a share repurchase program authorizing up to $40.0 billion in share repurchases. the share repurchase program became effective on october1, 2013,
has no expiration date, and may be suspended or discontinued at any time without notice. this share repurchase program replaced the share repurchase program that was announced on september22, 2008 and expired on september30, 2013. as of
june30, 2016, $7.1 billion remained of our $40.0 billion share repurchase program. while the program has no expiration date, we intend to complete it by december31, 2016. all repurchases were made using cash resources.
during fiscal year 2016, we repurchased 294million shares of microsoft common stock for $14.8 billion under the share repurchase program
approved by our board of directors on september16, 2013. during fiscal year 2015, we repurchased 295million shares of microsoft common stock for $13.2 billion under the share repurchase program approved by our board of directors on
september16, 2013. during fiscal year 2014, we repurchased 175million shares for $6.4 billion; 128million shares were repurchased for $4.9 billion under the share repurchase program approved by our board of directors on
september16, 2013, and 47million shares were repurchased for $1.5 billion under the share repurchase program that was announced on september22, 2008 and expired september30, 2013.
dividends  see note 18
stockholders equity of the notes to financial statements (part ii, item8 of this form 10-k) for further discussion.  off-balance sheet
arrangements  we provide indemnifications of varying scope and size to certain customers against claims of intellectual property
infringement made by third parties arising from the use of our products and certain other matters. additionally, we have agreed to cover damages resulting from breaches of certain security and privacy commitments in our cloud business. in evaluating
estimated losses on these indemnifications, we consider factors such as the degree of probability of an unfavorable outcome and our ability to make a reasonable estimate of the amount of loss. these obligations did not have a material impact on our
consolidated financial statements during the periods presented.
table of contents
part ii  item 7
contractual obligations  the following table summarizes the payments due by fiscal year for our outstanding contractual obligations as of june30, 2016:
(in millions)
2018-2019
2020-2021
thereafter
total
long-term
debt:(a)
principal payments
$
$
5,050
$
5,250
$
30,649
$
40,949
interest payments
1,289
2,547
2,324
16,836
22,996
construction commitments(b)
1,809
1,971
operating
leases(c)
1,918
1,467
2,118
6,464
purchase commitments(d)
13,214
1,102
4,004
19,078
other long-term liabilities(e)
total contractual obligations
$
17,273
$
10,866
$
9,822
$
53,882
$
91,843
(a)
see note 12  debt of the notes to financial statements (part ii, item8 of this form 10-k).
(b)
these amounts represent commitments for the construction of buildings, building improvements, and leasehold improvements.
(c)
these amounts represent undiscounted future minimum rental commitments under noncancellable facilities leases.
(d)
these amounts represent purchase commitments, including all open purchase orders and all contracts that are take-or-pay contracts that are not presented as
construction commitments above.
(e)
we have excluded long-term tax contingencies, other tax liabilities, deferred income taxes, and long-term pension liabilities of $13.0 billion from the
amounts presented as the timing of these obligations is uncertain. we have also excluded unearned revenue and non-cash items.
other planned uses of capital  in june
2016, we entered into a definitive agreement to acquire linkedin in an all-cash transaction valued at $26.2 billion, inclusive of linkedins net cash. we expect the acquisition will close in calendar year 2016, and we will finance the
transaction primarily through the issuance of new debt.  we will continue to invest in sales, marketing, product support infrastructure,
and existing and advanced areas of technology, as well as continue making acquisitions that align with our business strategy. additions to property and equipment will continue, including new facilities, datacenters, and computer systems for research
and development, sales and marketing, support, and administrative staff. we expect capital expenditures to increase in coming years in support of our productivity and platform strategy. we have operating leases for most u.s. and international sales
and support offices and certain equipment. we have not engaged in any related party transactions or arrangements with unconsolidated entities or other persons that are reasonably likely to materially affect liquidity or the availability of capital
resources.  liquidity  we earn a
significant amount of our operating income outside the u.s., which is deemed to be permanently reinvested in foreign jurisdictions. as a result, as discussed above under cash, cash equivalents, and investments, the majority of our cash, cash
equivalents, and short-term investments are held by foreign subsidiaries. we currently do not intend nor foresee a need to repatriate these funds. we expect existing domestic cash, cash equivalents, short-term investments, cash flows from
operations, and access to capital markets to continue to be sufficient to fund our domestic operating activities and cash commitments for investing and financing activities, such as regular quarterly dividends, debt maturities, and material capital
expenditures, for at least the next 12 months and thereafter for the foreseeable future. in addition, we expect existing foreign cash, cash equivalents, short-term investments, and cash flows from operations to continue to be sufficient to fund our
foreign operating activities and cash commitments for investing activities, such as material capital expenditures, for at least the next 12 months and thereafter for the foreseeable future.
table of contents
part ii  item 7
should we require more capital in the u.s. than is generated by our operations domestically, for
example to fund significant discretionary activities, such as business acquisitions and share repurchases, we could elect to repatriate future earnings from foreign jurisdictions or raise capital in the u.s. through debt or equity issuances. these
alternatives could result in higher effective tax rates, increased interest expense, or dilution of our earnings. we have borrowed funds domestically and continue to believe we have the ability to do so at reasonable interest rates.
recent accounting guidance
see note 1  accounting policies of the notes to financial statements (part ii, item8 of this form 10-k) for further discussion.
application of critical accounting policies  our consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes are prepared in accordance with u.s. gaap. preparing consolidated financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect
the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, and expenses. these estimates and assumptions are affected by managements application of accounting policies. critical accounting policies for us include revenue recognition, impairment of
investment securities, goodwill, research and development costs, contingencies, income taxes, and inventories.  revenue recognition
revenue recognition for multiple-element arrangements requires judgment to determine if multiple elements exist, whether elements can be accounted
for as separate units of accounting, and if so, the fair value for each of the elements.  judgment is also required to assess whether
future releases of certain software represent new products or upgrades and enhancements to existing products. certain volume licensing arrangements include a perpetual license for current products combined with rights to receive unspecified future
versions of software products and are accounted for as subscriptions, with billings recorded as unearned revenue and recognized as revenue ratably over the coverage period.  software updates are evaluated on a case-by-case basis to determine whether they meet the definition of an upgrade, which may require revenue to be deferred and recognized when the upgrade is delivered. if it is
determined that implied post-contract customer support (pcs) is being provided, revenue from the arrangement is deferred and recognized over the implied pcs term. if updates are determined to not meet the definition of an upgrade,
revenue is generally recognized as products are shipped or made available.  microsoft enters into arrangements that can include various
combinations of software, services, and hardware. where elements are delivered over different periods of time, and when allowed under u.s. gaap, revenue is allocated to the respective elements based on their relative selling prices at the inception
of the arrangement, and revenue is recognized as each element is delivered. we use a hierarchy to determine the fair value to be used for allocating revenue to elements: (i) vendor-specific objective evidence of fair value (vsoe), (ii)
third-party evidence, and (iii) best estimate of selling price (esp). for software elements, we follow the industry-specific software guidance which only allows for the use of vsoe in establishing fair value. generally, vsoe is the price
charged when the deliverable is sold separately or the price established by management for a product that is not yet sold if it is probable that the price will not change before introduction into the marketplace. esps are established as best
estimates of what the selling prices would be if the deliverables were sold regularly on a stand-alone basis. our process for determining esps requires judgment and considers multiple factors that may vary over time depending upon the unique facts
and circumstances related to each deliverable.  in january 2015, we announced windows 10 would be free to all qualified existing users
of windows 7 and windows 8.1. this offer differs from historical offers preceding the launch of new versions of windows as it is being made
table of contents
part ii  item 7
available for free to existing users in addition to new customers after the offer announcement. we evaluated the nature and accounting treatment of the windows 10 offer and determined that it
represents a marketing and promotional activity, in part because the offer is being made available for free to existing users. as this is a marketing and promotional activity, revenue recognition of new sales of windows 8 will continue to be
recognized as delivered.  customers purchasing a windows 10 license will receive unspecified updates and upgrades over the life of their
windows 10 device at no additional cost. as these updates and upgrades will not be sold on a stand-alone basis, we are unable to establish vsoe. accordingly, revenue from licenses of windows 10 is recognized ratably over the estimated life of the
related device, which ranges between two to four years.  we currently are evaluating the impact of the new standard related to revenue
recognition, which we anticipate will have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements. see note 1  accounting policies of the notes to financial statements (part ii, item8 of this form 10-k) for further discussion.
impairment of investment securities  we review investments quarterly for indicators of other-than-temporary impairment. this determination requires significant judgment. in making this judgment, we employ a systematic methodology quarterly that
considers available quantitative and qualitative evidence in evaluating potential impairment of our investments. if the cost of an investment exceeds its fair value, we evaluate, among other factors, general market conditions, credit quality of debt
instrument issuers, the duration and extent to which the fair value is less than cost, and for equity securities, our intent and ability to hold, or plans to sell, the investment. for fixed-income securities, we also evaluate whether we have plans
to sell the security or it is more likely than not that we will be required to sell the security before recovery. we also consider specific adverse conditions related to the financial health of and business outlook for the investee, including
industry and sector performance, changes in technology, and operational and financing cash flow factors. once a decline in fair value is determined to be other-than-temporary, an impairment charge is recorded to other income (expense), net and a new
cost basis in the investment is established. if market, industry, and/or investee conditions deteriorate, we may incur future impairments.  goodwill
we allocate goodwill to reporting units based on the reporting unit expected to benefit from the business combination. we evaluate
our reporting units on an annual basis and, if necessary, reassign goodwill using a relative fair value allocation approach. goodwill is tested for impairment at the reporting unit level (operating segment or one level below an operating segment) on
an annual basis (may 1 for us) and between annual tests if an event occurs or circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of a reporting unit below its carrying value. these events or circumstances could include a
significant change in the business climate, legal factors, operating performance indicators, competition, or sale or disposition of a significant portion of a reporting unit.  application of the goodwill impairment test requires judgment, including the identification of reporting units, assignment of assets and liabilities to reporting units, assignment of goodwill to reporting units,
and determination of the fair value of each reporting unit. the fair value of each reporting unit is estimated primarily through the use of a discounted cash flow methodology. this analysis requires significant judgments, including estimation of
future cash flows, which is dependent on internal forecasts, estimation of the long-term rate of growth for our business, estimation of the useful life over which cash flows will occur, and determination of our weighted average cost of capital.
the estimates used to calculate the fair value of a reporting unit change from year to year based on operating results, market
conditions, and other factors. changes in these estimates and assumptions could materially affect the determination of fair value and goodwill impairment for each reporting unit.
table of contents
part ii  item 7
research and development costs  costs incurred internally in researching and developing a computer software product are charged to expense until technological feasibility has been established for the product. once technological feasibility is
established, all software costs are capitalized until the product is available for general release to customers. judgment is required in determining when technological feasibility of a product is established. we have determined that technological
feasibility for our software products is reached after all high-risk development issues have been resolved through coding and testing. generally, this occurs shortly before the products are released to manufacturing. the amortization of these costs
is included in cost of revenue over the estimated life of the products.  legal and other contingencies
the outcomes of legal proceedings and claims brought against us are subject to significant uncertainty. an estimated loss from a loss contingency
such as a legal proceeding or claim is accrued by a charge to income if it is probable that an asset has been impaired or a liability has been incurred and the amount of the loss can be reasonably estimated. in determining whether a loss should be
accrued we evaluate, among other factors, the degree of probability of an unfavorable outcome and the ability to make a reasonable estimate of the amount of loss. changes in these factors could materially impact our consolidated financial
statements.  income taxes  the
objectives of accounting for income taxes are to recognize the amount of taxes payable or refundable for the current year and deferred tax liabilities and assets for the future tax consequences of events that have been recognized in an entitys
financial statements or tax returns. we recognize the tax benefit from an uncertain tax position only if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities, based on the technical merits of
the position. the tax benefits recognized in the financial statements from such a position are measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement. accounting literature also
provides guidance on derecognition of income tax assets and liabilities, classification of deferred income tax assets and liabilities, accounting for interest and penalties associated with tax positions, and income tax disclosures. judgment is
required in assessing the future tax consequences of events that have been recognized on our consolidated financial statements or tax returns. variations in the actual outcome of these future tax consequences could materially impact our consolidated
financial statements.  inventories  inventories are stated at average cost, subject to the lower of cost or market. cost includes materials, labor, and manufacturing overhead related to the purchase and production of inventories. we regularly review
inventory quantities on hand, future purchase commitments with our suppliers, and the estimated utility of our inventory. these reviews include analysis of demand forecasts, product life cycle status, product development plans, current sales levels,
pricing strategy, and component cost trends. if our review indicates a reduction in utility below carrying value, we reduce our inventory to a new cost basis through a charge to cost of revenue.
table of contents
part ii  item 7
statement of managements responsibility for financial statements
management is responsible for the preparation of the consolidated financial statements and related information that are presented in this report.
the consolidated financial statements, which include amounts based on managements estimates and judgments, have been prepared in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the united states of america.
the company designs and maintains accounting and internal control systems to provide reasonable assurance at reasonable cost that assets are
safeguarded against loss from unauthorized use or disposition, and that the financial records are reliable for preparing consolidated financial statements and maintaining accountability for assets. these systems are augmented by written policies, an
organizational structure providing division of responsibilities, careful selection and training of qualified personnel, and a program of internal audits.  the company engaged deloitte& touche llp, an independent registered public accounting firm, to audit and render an opinion on the consolidated financial statements and internal control over financial
reporting in accordance with the standards of the public company accounting oversight board (united states).  the board of directors,
through its audit committee, consisting solely of independent directors of the company, meets periodically with management, internal auditors, and our independent registered public accounting firm to ensure that each is meeting its responsibilities
and to discuss matters concerning internal controls and financial reporting. deloitte& touche llp and the internal auditors each have full and free access to the audit committee.
satya nadella
chief executive officer
amy e. hood
executive vice president and chief financial officer
frank h. brod
corporate vice president, finance and administration; chief accounting officer
table of contents
part ii  item 7a
item7a.quantitative and qualitative disclosures about
market risk  risks  we are exposed to economic risk from foreign exchange rates, interest rates, credit risk, equity prices, and commodity prices. a portion of these risks is hedged, but they may impact our consolidated financial
statements.  foreign currency
certain forecasted transactions, assets, and liabilities are exposed to foreign currency risk. we monitor our foreign currency exposures daily and
use hedges where practicable to offset the risks and maximize the economic effectiveness of our foreign currency positions. principal currencies hedged include the euro, japanese yen, british pound, canadian dollar, and australian dollar.
interest rate  our fixed-income
portfolio is diversified across credit sectors and maturities, consisting primarily of investment-grade securities. the credit risk and average maturity of the fixed-income portfolio is managed to achieve economic returns that correlate to certain
global and domestic fixed-income indices. in addition, we use to be announced forward purchase commitments of mortgage-backed assets to gain exposure to agency mortgage-backed securities.
equity  our equity portfolio consists of
global, developed, and emerging market securities that are subject to market price risk.we manage the securities relative to certain global and domestic indices and expect their economic risk and return to correlate with these indices.
commodity  we use broad-based
commodity exposures to enhance portfolio returns and facilitate portfolio diversification. our investment portfolio has exposure to a variety of commodities, including precious metals, energy, and grain. we manage these exposures relative to global
commodity indices and expect their economic risk and return to correlate with these indices.  value-at-risk
we use a value-at-risk (var) model to estimate and quantify our market risks. var is the expected loss, for a given confidence level,
in the fair value of our portfolio due to adverse market movements over a defined time horizon. the var model is not intended to represent actual losses in fair value, including determinations of other-than-temporary losses in fair value in
accordance with u.s. gaap, but is used as a risk estimation and management tool. the distribution of the potential changes in total market value of all holdings is computed based on the historical volatilities and correlations among foreign exchange
rates, interest rates, equity prices, and commodity prices, assuming normal market conditions.  the var is calculated as the total loss
that will not be exceeded at the 97.5 percentile confidence level or, alternatively stated, the losses could exceed the var in 25 out of 1,000 cases. several risk factors are not captured in the model, including liquidity risk, operational risk, and
legal risk.
table of contents
part ii  item 7a
the following table sets forth the one-day var for substantially all of our positions as of
june30, 2016 and 2015 and for the year ended june30, 2016:
(in millions)
june30, 2016
june30, 2015
yearended june30,
risk categories
average
high
low
foreign currency
$
$
$
$
$
interest rate
$
$
$
$
$
equity
$
$
$
$
$
commodity
$
$
$
$
$
total one-day var for the combined risk categories was $225 million as of june30, 2016 and $237 million as of
june30, 2015. the total var is 29% less as of june30, 2016 and june30, 2015, respectively, than the sum of the separate risk categories in the table above due to the diversification benefit of the combination of risks.
table of contents
part ii  item 8
item 8. financial statements and supplementary data
income statements
(in millions, except per share amounts)
year ended june30,
revenue:
product
$
61,502
$
75,956
$
72,948
service and other
23,818
17,624
13,885
total revenue
85,320
93,580
86,833
cost of revenue:
product
17,880
21,410
16,681
service and other
14,900
11,628
10,397
total cost of revenue
32,780
33,038
27,078
gross margin
52,540
60,542
59,755
research and development
11,988
12,046
11,381
sales and marketing
14,697
15,713
15,811
general and administrative
4,563
4,611
4,677
impairment, integration, and restructuring
1,110
10,011
operating income
20,182
18,161
27,759
other income (expense), net
(431
)
income before income taxes
19,751
18,507
27,820
provision for income taxes
2,953
6,314
5,746
net income
$
16,798
$
12,193
$
22,074
earnings per share:
basic
$
2.12
$
1.49
$
2.66
diluted
$
2.10
$
1.48
$
2.63
weighted average shares outstanding:
basic
7,925
8,177
8,299
diluted
8,013
8,254
8,399
cash dividends declared per common share
$
1.44
$
1.24
$
1.12
see accompanying notes.
table of contents
part ii  item 8
comprehensive income statements
(in millions)
year ended june30,
net income
$
16,798
$
12,193
$
22,074
other comprehensive income (loss):
net unrealized gains (losses) on derivatives (net of tax effects of $(12), $20, and $(4))
(238
)
(35
)
net unrealized gains (losses) on investments (net of tax effects of $(121), $(197), and $936)
(228
)
(362
)
1,737
translation adjustments and other (net of tax effects of $(33), $16, and $12)
(519
)
(1,383
)
other comprehensive income (loss)
(985
)
(1,186
)
1,965
comprehensive income
$
15,813
$
11,007
$
24,039
see accompanying notes.
table of contents
part ii  item 8
balance sheets
(in millions)
june30,
assets
current assets:
cash and cash equivalents
$
6,510
$
5,595
short-term investments (including securities loaned of $204 and $75)
106,730
90,931
total cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments
113,240
96,526
accounts receivable, net of allowance for doubtful accounts of $426 and $335
18,277
17,908
inventories
2,251
2,902
other
5,892
5,461
total current assets
139,660
122,797
property and equipment, net of accumulated depreciation of $19,800 and $17,606
18,356
14,731
equity and other investments
10,431
12,053
goodwill
17,872
16,939
intangible assets, net
3,733
4,835
other long-term assets
3,642
3,117
total assets
$
193,694
$
174,472
liabilities and stockholders equity
current liabilities:
accounts payable
$
6,898
$
6,591
short-term debt
12,904
4,985
current portion of long-term debt
2,499
accrued compensation
5,264
5,096
income taxes
short-term unearned revenue
27,468
23,223
securities lending payable
other
5,949
6,555
total current liabilities
59,357
49,647
long-term debt
40,783
27,808
long-term unearned revenue
6,441
2,095
deferred income taxes
1,476
1,295
other long-term liabilities
13,640
13,544
total liabilities
121,697
94,389
commitments and contingencies
stockholders equity:
common stock and paid-in capital  shares authorized 24,000; outstanding 7,808 and 8,027
68,178
68,465
retained earnings
2,282
9,096
accumulated other comprehensive income
1,537
2,522
total stockholders equity
71,997
80,083
total liabilities and stockholders equity
$
193,694
$
174,472
see accompanying notes.
table of contents
part ii  item 8
cash flows statements
(in millions)
year ended june30,
operations
net income
$
16,798
$
12,193
$
22,074
adjustments to reconcile net income to net cash from operations:
goodwill and asset impairments
7,498
depreciation, amortization, and other
6,622
5,957
5,212
stock-based compensation expense
2,668
2,574
2,446
net recognized gains on investments and derivatives
(223
)
(443
)
(109
)
deferred income taxes
(331
)
deferral of unearned revenue
57,072
45,072
44,325
recognition of unearned revenue
(48,498
)
(44,920
)
(41,739
)
changes in operating assets and liabilities:
accounts receivable
(530
)
1,456
(1,120
)
inventories
(272
)
(161
)
other current assets
(1,167
)
(29
)
other long-term assets
(41
)
(628
)
accounts payable
(1,054
)
other current liabilities
(260
)
(624
)
1,075
other long-term liabilities
(766
)
1,599
1,014
net cash from operations
33,325
29,668
32,502
financing
proceeds from issuance of short-term debt, maturities of 90 days or less, net
7,195
4,481
proceeds from issuance of debt
13,884
10,680
10,350
repayments of debt
(2,796
)
(1,500
)
(3,888
)
common stock issued
common stock repurchased
(15,969
)
(14,443
)
(7,316
)
common stock cash dividends paid
(11,006
)
(9,882
)
(8,879
)
other
(369
)
(39
)
net cash used in financing
(8,393
)
(9,668
)
(8,665
)
investing
additions to property and equipment
(8,343
)
(5,944
)
(5,485
)
acquisition of companies, net of cash acquired, and purchases of intangible and other assets
(1,393
)
(3,723
)
(5,937
)
purchases of investments
(129,758
)
(98,729
)
(72,690
)
maturities of investments
22,054
15,013
5,272
sales of investments
93,287
70,848
60,094
securities lending payable
(466
)
(87
)
net cash used in investing
(23,950
)
(23,001
)
(18,833
)
effect of foreign exchange rates on cash and cash equivalents
(67
)
(73
)
(139
)
net change in cash and cash equivalents
(3,074
)
4,865
cash and cash equivalents, beginning of period
5,595
8,669
3,804
cash and cash equivalents, end of period
$
6,510
$
5,595
$
8,669
see accompanying notes.
table of contents
part ii  item 8
stockholders equity statements
(in millions)
year ended june30,
common stock and paid-in capital
balance, beginning of period
$
68,465
$
68,366
$
67,306
common stock issued
common stock repurchased
(3,689
)
(3,700
)
(2,328
)
stock-based compensation expense
2,668
2,574
2,446
stock-based compensation income tax benefits
other, net
balance, end of period
68,178
68,465
68,366
retained earnings
balance, beginning of period
9,096
17,710
9,895
net income
16,798
12,193
22,074
common stock cash dividends
(11,329
)
(10,063
)
(9,271
)
common stock repurchased
(12,283
)
(10,744
)
(4,988
)
balance, end of period
2,282
9,096
17,710
accumulated other comprehensive income
balance, beginning of period
2,522
3,708
1,743
other comprehensive income (loss)
(985
)
(1,186
)
1,965
balance, end of period
1,537
2,522
3,708
total stockholders equity
$
71,997
$
80,083
$
89,784
see accompanying notes.
table of contents
part ii  item 8
notes to financial statements
note 1  accounting policies
accounting principles  the consolidated
financial statements and accompanying notes are prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the united states of america (u.s. gaap).  we have recast certain prior period amounts to conform to the current period presentation, with no impact on consolidated net income or cash flows.  principles of consolidation  the consolidated financial statements include the accounts of
microsoft corporation and its subsidiaries. intercompany transactions and balances have been eliminated. equity investments through which we are able to exercise significant influence over but do not control the investee and are not the primary
beneficiary of the investees activities are accounted for using the equity method. investments through which we are not able to exercise significant influence over the investee and which do not have readily determinable fair values are
accounted for under the cost method.  segment information  in june 2015, we announced a change in organizational structure to align to our strategic direction as a productivity and platform company. during the first quarter of fiscal year 2016, our chief operating decision
maker, who is also our chief executive officer, requested changes in the information that he regularly reviews for purposes of allocating resources and assessing performance. as a result, beginning in fiscal year 2016, we report our financial
performance based on our new segments described in note 21  segment information and geographic data. we have recast certain prior period amounts to conform to the way we internally manage and monitor segment performance during fiscal year
2016. this change primarily impacted note 10  goodwill, note 15  unearned revenue, and note 21  segment information and geographic data, with no impact on consolidated net income or cash flows.
estimates and assumptions  preparing
financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, and expenses. examples of estimates include: loss contingencies; product warranties; the fair value of,
and/or potential impairment of goodwill and intangible assets, for our reporting units; product life cycles; useful lives of our tangible and intangible assets; allowances for doubtful accounts; allowances for product returns; the market value of
and volume of demand for our inventory; and stock-based compensation forfeiture rates. examples of assumptions include: the elements comprising a software arrangement, including the distinction between upgrades or enhancements and new products; when
technological feasibility is achieved for our products; the potential outcome of future tax consequences of events that have been recognized on our consolidated financial statements or tax returns; and determining when investment impairments are
other-than-temporary. actual results and outcomes may differ from managements estimates and assumptions.  foreign currencies
assets and liabilities recorded in foreign currencies are translated at the exchange rate on the balance sheet date. revenue and expenses are
translated at average rates of exchange prevailing during the year. translation adjustments resulting from this process are recorded to other comprehensive income (oci).
table of contents
part ii  item 8
product revenue and service and other revenue
service revenue exceeded 10% of total revenue for the first time in fiscal year 2016. as a result, we have separately disclosed product revenue and
service and other revenue on our consolidated income statements.  product revenue includes sales from operating systems; cross-device
productivity applications; server applications; business solution applications; desktop and server management tools; software development tools; video games; hardware such as pcs, tablets, gaming and entertainment consoles, phones, other intelligent
devices, and related accessories; and training and certification of computer system integrators and developers.  service and other
revenue includes sales from cloud-based solutions that provide customers with software, services, platforms, and content such as office 365, microsoft azure (azure), microsoft dynamics (dynamics) crm online, and xbox live;
solution support; and consulting services. service and other revenue also includes sales from online advertising.  revenue recognition
revenue is recognized when persuasive evidence of an arrangement exists, delivery has occurred, the fee is fixed or determinable,
and collectability is probable. revenue generally is recognized net of allowances for returns and any taxes collected from customers and subsequently remitted to governmental authorities.
revenue recognition for multiple-element arrangements requires judgment to determine if multiple elements exist, whether elements can be accounted
for as separate units of accounting, and if so, the fair value for each of the elements.  microsoft enters into arrangements that can
include various combinations of software, services, and hardware. where elements are delivered over different periods of time, and when allowed under u.s. gaap, revenue is allocated to the respective elements based on their relative selling prices
at the inception of the arrangement, and revenue is recognized as each element is delivered. we use a hierarchy to determine the fair value to be used for allocating revenue to elements: (i)vendor-specific objective evidence of fair value
(vsoe), (ii)third-party evidence, and (iii)best estimate of selling price (esp). for software elements, we follow the industry specific software guidance which only allows for the use of vsoe in establishing fair
value. generally, vsoe is the price charged when the deliverable is sold separately or the price established by management for a product that is not yet sold if it is probable that the price will not change before introduction into the marketplace.
esps are established as best estimates of what the selling prices would be if the deliverables were sold regularly on a stand-alone basis. our process for determining esps requires judgment and considers multiple factors that may vary over time
depending upon the unique facts and circumstances related to each deliverable.  revenue for retail packaged products, products licensed
to original equipment manufacturers (oems), and perpetual licenses under certain volume licensing programs generally is recognized as products are shipped or made available.
technology guarantee programs are accounted for as multiple-element arrangements as customers receive free or significantly discounted rights to
use upcoming new versions of a software product if they license existing versions of the product during the eligibility period. revenue is allocated between the existing product and the new product, and revenue allocated to the new product is
deferred until that version is delivered. the revenue allocation is based on the vsoe of fair value of the products. the vsoe of fair value for upcoming new products are based on the price determined by management having the relevant authority when
the element is not yet sold separately, but is expected to be sold in the near future at the price set by management.  software updates
that will be provided free of charge are evaluated on a case-by-case basis to determine whether they meet the definition of an upgrade and create a multiple-element arrangement, which may require revenue to be deferred and recognized when the
upgrade is delivered, or if it is determined that implied post-contract customer support (pcs) is being provided, the arrangement is accounted for as a multiple-element arrangement and all
table of contents
part ii  item 8
revenue from the arrangement is deferred and recognized over the implied pcs term when the vsoe of fair value does not exist. if updates are determined to not meet the definition of an upgrade,
revenue is generally recognized as products are shipped or made available.  customers purchasing a windows 10 license will receive
unspecified updates and upgrades over the life of their windows 10 device at no additional cost. as these updates and upgrades will not be sold on a stand-alone basis, we are unable to establish vsoe of fair value. accordingly, revenue from licenses
of windows 10 is recognized ratably over the estimated life of the related device, which ranges between two to four years.  certain
volume licensing arrangements include a perpetual license for current products combined with rights to receive unspecified future versions of software products, which we have determined are additional software products and are therefore accounted
for as subscriptions, with billings recorded as unearned revenue and recognized as revenue ratably over the coverage period. arrangements that include term-based licenses for current products with the right to use unspecified future versions of the
software during the coverage period, are also accounted for as subscriptions, with revenue recognized ratably over the coverage period. revenue from cloud-based services arrangements that allow for the use of a hosted software product or service
over a contractually determined period of time without taking possession of software are accounted for as subscriptions with billings recorded as unearned revenue and recognized as revenue ratably over the coverage period beginning on the date the
service is made available to customers. revenue from cloud-based services arrangements that are provided on a consumption basis (for example, the amount of storage used in a particular period) is recognized commensurate with the customer utilization
of such resources.  some volume licensing arrangements include time-based subscriptions for cloud-based services and software offerings
that are accounted for as subscriptions. these arrangements are considered multiple-element arrangements. however, because all elements are accounted for as subscriptions and have the same coverage period and delivery pattern, they have the same
revenue recognition timing.  revenue related to microsoft surface (surface) devices, xbox consoles, games published by us,
phones, and other hardware components is generally recognized when ownership is transferred to the resellers or to end customers when selling directly through microsoft retail stores and online marketplaces. a portion of revenue may be deferred when
these products are combined with software elements, and/or services. revenue related to licensing for games published by third parties for use on the xbox consoles is recognized when games are manufactured by the game publishers.
display advertising revenue is recognized as advertisements are displayed. search advertising revenue is recognized when the ad appears in the
search results or when the action necessary to earn the revenue has been completed. consulting services revenue is recognized as services are rendered, generally based on the negotiated hourly rate in the consulting arrangement and the number of
hours worked during the period. consulting revenue for fixed-price services arrangements is recognized as services are provided.  cost of revenue
cost of revenue includes: manufacturing and distribution costs for products sold and programs licensed; operating costs related to
product support service centers and product distribution centers; costs incurred to include software on pcs sold by oems, to drive traffic to our websites, and to acquire online advertising space; costs incurred to support and maintain
internet-based products and services, including datacenter costs and royalties; warranty costs; inventory valuation adjustments; costs associated with the delivery of consulting services; and the amortization of capitalized software development
costs. capitalized software development costs are amortized over the estimated lives of the products.  product warranty
we provide for the estimated costs of fulfilling our obligations under hardware and software warranties at the time the related revenue is
recognized. for hardware warranties, we estimate the costs based on historical and projected
table of contents
part ii  item 8
product failure rates, historical and projected repair costs, and knowledge of specific product failures (if any). the specific hardware warranty terms and conditions vary depending upon the
product sold and the country in which we do business, but generally include parts and labor over a period generally ranging from 90days to three years. for software warranties, we estimate the costs to provide bug fixes, such as security
patches, over the estimated life of the software. we regularly reevaluate our estimates to assess the adequacy of the recorded warranty liabilities and adjust the amounts as necessary.  research and development  research and development expenses include payroll, employee
benefits, stock-based compensation expense, and other headcount-related expenses associated with product development. research and development expenses also include third-party development and programming costs, localization costs incurred to
translate software for international markets, and the amortization of purchased software code and services content. such costs related to software development are included in research and development expense until the point that technological
feasibility is reached, which for our software products, is generally shortly before the products are released to manufacturing. once technological feasibility is reached, such costs are capitalized and amortized to cost of revenue over the
estimated lives of the products.  sales and marketing  sales and marketing expenses include payroll, employee benefits, stock-based compensation expense, and other headcount-related expenses associated with sales and marketing personnel, and the costs of advertising,
promotions, trade shows, seminars, and other programs. advertising costs are expensed as incurred. advertising expense was $1.6 billion, $1.9 billion, and $2.3 billion in fiscal years 2016, 2015, and 2014, respectively.
stock-based compensation  compensation cost
for stock awards is measured at the fair value on the grant date and recognized as expense, net of estimated forfeitures, over the related service period using the straight-line method. the fair value of stock awards is based on the quoted price of
our common stock on the grant date less the present value of expected dividends not received during the vesting period. compensation expense for the employee stock purchase plan (espp) is measured as the discount the employee is entitled
to upon purchase and is recognized in the period of purchase.  income taxes
income tax expense includes u.s. and international income taxes, the provision for u.s. taxes on undistributed earnings of international
subsidiaries not deemed to be permanently reinvested, and interest and penalties on uncertain tax positions. certain income and expenses are not reported in tax returns and financial statements in the same year. the tax effect of such temporary
differences is reported as deferred income taxes. deferred tax assets are reported net of a valuation allowance when it is more likely than not that a tax benefit will not be realized. all deferred income taxes are classified as long-term on our
consolidated balance sheets.  fair value measurements  we account for certain assets and liabilities at fair value. the hierarchy below lists three levels of fair value based on the extent to which inputs used in measuring fair value are observable in the
market.we categorize each of our fair value measurements in one of these three levels based on the lowest level input that is significant to the fair value measurement in its entirety. these levels are:
level 1  inputs are based upon unadjusted quoted prices for identical instruments traded in active markets. our level 1 non-derivative
investments primarily include u.s. government securities, domestic and international equities, and actively traded mutual funds.our level 1 derivative assets and liabilities include those actively traded on exchanges.
table of contents
part ii  item 8
level 2  inputs are based upon quoted prices for similar instruments in active markets, quoted prices for identical or similar instruments in
markets that are not active, and model-based valuation techniques (e.g. the black-scholes model) for which all significant inputs are observable in the market or can be corroborated by observable market data for substantially the full term of the
assets or liabilities. where applicable, these models project future cash flows and discount the future amounts to a present value using market-based observable inputs including interest rate curves, credit spreads, foreign exchange rates, and
forward and spot prices for currencies and commodities. our level 2 non-derivative investments consist primarily of corporate notes and bonds, common and preferred stock, mortgage- and asset-backed securities, u.s. government and agency securities,
and foreign government bonds. our level 2 derivative assets and liabilities primarily include certain over-the-counter option and swap contracts.
level 3  inputs are generally unobservable and typically reflect managements estimates of assumptions that market participants would use in
pricing the asset or liability. the fair values are therefore determined using model-based techniques, including option pricing models and discounted cash flow models. our level 3 non-derivative assets primarily comprise investments in common and
preferred stock, and goodwill and intangible assets, when they are recorded at fair value due to an impairment charge.unobservable inputs used in the models are significant to the fair values of the assets and liabilities.
we measure certain assets, including our cost and equity method investments, at fair value on a nonrecurring basis
when they are deemed to be other-than-temporarily impaired. the fair values of these investments are determined based on valuation techniques using the best information available, and may include quoted market prices, market comparables, and
discounted cash flow projections. an impairment charge is recorded when the cost of the investment exceeds its fair value and this condition is determined to be other-than-temporary.
our other current financial assets and our current financial liabilities have fair values that approximate their carrying values.
financial instruments  investments
we consider all highly liquid interest-earning investments with a maturity of three months or less at the date of purchase to be cash equivalents.
the fair values of these investments approximate their carrying values. in general, investments with original maturities of greater than three months and remaining maturities of less than one year are classified as short-term investments.
investments with maturities beyond one year may be classified as short-term based on their highly liquid nature and because such marketable securities represent the investment of cash that is available for current operations. all cash equivalents
and short-term investments are classified as available-for-sale and realized gains and losses are recorded using the specific identification method. changes in market value, excluding other-than-temporary impairments, are reflected in oci.
equity and other investments classified as long-term include both debt and equity instruments. debt and publicly-traded equity
securities are classified as available-for-sale and realized gains and losses are recorded using the specific identification method. changes in the market value of available-for-sale securities, excluding other-than-temporary impairments, are
reflected in oci. common and preferred stock and other investments that are restricted for more than one year or are not publicly traded are recorded at cost or using the equity method.
we lend certain fixed-income and equity securities to increase investment returns. these transactions are accounted for as secured borrowings and
the loaned securities continue to be carried as investments on our consolidated balance sheets. cash and/or security interests are received as collateral for the loaned securities with the amount determined based upon the underlying security lent
and the creditworthiness of the borrower. cash received is recorded as an asset with a corresponding liability.  investments are
considered to be impaired when a decline in fair value is judged to be other-than-temporary. fair value is calculated based on publicly available market information or other estimates determined by management. we employ a systematic methodology on a
quarterly basis that considers available quantitative and qualitative
table of contents
part ii  item 8
evidence in evaluating potential impairment of our investments. if the cost of an investment exceeds its fair value, we evaluate, among other factors, general market conditions, credit quality of
debt instrument issuers, the duration and extent to which the fair value is less than cost, and for equity securities, our intent and ability to hold, or plans to sell, the investment. for fixed-income securities, we also evaluate whether we have
plans to sell the security or it is more likely than not that we will be required to sell the security before recovery. we also consider specific adverse conditions related to the financial health of and business outlook for the investee, including
industry and sector performance, changes in technology, and operational and financing cash flow factors. once a decline in fair value is determined to be other-than-temporary, an impairment charge is recorded to other income (expense), net and a new
cost basis in the investment is established.  derivatives  derivative instruments are recognized as either assets or liabilities and are measured at fair value. the accounting for changes in the fair value of a derivative depends on the intended use of the derivative and
the resulting designation.  for derivative instruments designated as fair value hedges, the gains (losses) are recognized in earnings in
the periods of change together with the offsetting losses (gains) on the hedged items attributed to the risk being hedged. for options designated as fair value hedges, changes in the time value are excluded from the assessment of hedge effectiveness
and are recognized in earnings.  for derivative instruments designated as cash flow hedges, the effective portion of the gains (losses)
on the derivatives is initially reported as a component of oci and is subsequently recognized in earnings when the hedged exposure is recognized in earnings. for options designated as cash flow hedges, changes in the time value are excluded from the
assessment of hedge effectiveness and are recognized in earnings. gains (losses) on derivatives representing either hedge components excluded from the assessment of effectiveness or hedge ineffectiveness are recognized in earnings.
for derivative instruments that are not designated as hedges, gains (losses) from changes in fair values are primarily recognized in other income
(expense), net. other than those derivatives entered into for investment purposes, such as commodity contracts, the gains (losses) are generally economically offset by unrealized gains (losses) in the underlying available-for-sale securities, which
are recorded as a component of oci until the securities are sold or other-than-temporarily impaired, at which time the amounts are reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive income (aoci) into other income (expense), net.
allowance for doubtful accounts
the allowance for doubtful accounts reflects our best estimate of probable losses inherent in the accounts receivable balance. we determine the
allowance based on known troubled accounts, historical experience, and other currently available evidence. activity in the allowance for doubtful accounts was as follows:
(in millions)
year ended june30,
balance, beginning of period
$
$
$
charged to costs and other
write-offs
(55
)
(43
)
(51
)
balance, end of period
$
$
$
inventories
inventories are stated at average cost, subject to the lower of cost or market. cost includes materials, labor, and manufacturing overhead related
to the purchase and production of inventories. we regularly review inventory
table of contents
part ii  item 8
quantities on hand, future purchase commitments with our suppliers, and the estimated utility of our inventory. if our review indicates a reduction in utility below carrying value, we reduce our
inventory to a new cost basis through a charge to cost of revenue.  property and equipment
property and equipment is stated at cost less accumulated depreciation, and depreciated using the straight-line method over the shorter of the
estimated useful life of the asset or the lease term. the estimated useful lives of our property and equipment are generally as follows: computer software developed or acquired for internal use, three to seven years; computer equipment, two to three
years; buildings and improvements, five to 15 years; leasehold improvements, three to 20 years; and furniture and equipment, one to 10 years. land is not depreciated.  goodwill  goodwill is tested for impairment at the reporting unit level (operating segment or
one level below an operating segment) on an annual basis (may 1 for us) and between annual tests if an event occurs or circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of a reporting unit below its carrying value.
intangible assets  all of our
intangible assets are subject to amortization and are amortized using the straight-line method over their estimated period of benefit, ranging from one to 15 years. we evaluate the recoverability of intangible assets periodically by taking into
account events or circumstances that may warrant revised estimates of useful lives or that indicate the asset may be impaired.  recent accounting
guidance  recently adopted accounting guidance  improvements to employee share-based payment accounting  in march 2016, the financial
accounting standards board (fasb) issued a new standard that changes the accounting for certain aspects of share-based payments to employees. the new guidance requires excess tax benefits and tax deficiencies to be recorded in the income
statement when stock awards vest or are settled. in addition, cash flows related to excess tax benefits will no longer be separately classified as a financing activity apart from other income tax cash flows. the standard also allows us to repurchase
more of an employees vesting shares for tax withholding purposes without triggering liability accounting, clarifies that all cash payments made to tax authorities on an employees behalf for withheld shares should be presented as a
financing activity on our cash flows statement, and provides an accounting policy election to account for forfeitures as they occur. the new standard is effective for us beginning july1, 2017, with early adoption permitted.
we elected to early adopt the new guidance in the third quarter of fiscal year 2016 which requires us to reflect any adjustments as of july1,
2015, the beginning of the annual period that includes the interim period of adoption. the primary impact of adoption was the recognition of excess tax benefits in our provision for income taxes rather than paid-in capital for all periods in fiscal
year 2016.additional amendments to the accounting for income taxes and minimum statutory withholding tax requirements had no impact to retained earnings as of july1, 2015, where the cumulative effect of these changes are required to be
recorded. we have elected to continue to estimate forfeitures expected to occur to determine the amount of compensation cost to be recognized in each period.  we elected to apply the presentation requirements for cash flows related to excess tax benefits retrospectively to all periods presented which resulted in an increase to both net cash from operations and net cash
used in financing of $588 million and $271 million for the years ended june30, 2015 and 2014, respectively. the presentation requirements for cash flows related to employee taxes paid for withheld shares had no impact to any of the periods
presented on our consolidated cash flows statements since such cash flows have historically been presented as a financing activity.
table of contents
part ii  item 8
adoption of the new standard resulted in the recognition of excess tax benefits in our provision
for income taxes rather than paid-in capital of $402 million for the year ended june30, 2016.  balance sheet classification of deferred taxes
in november 2015, the fasb issued guidance that requires companies to classify all deferred tax assets and liabilities as
noncurrent on the balance sheet rather than separately disclosing deferred taxes as current and noncurrent. this standard is effective for us beginning july1, 2017, and can be early adopted and applied either prospectively or retrospectively
to all periods presented upon adoption.  we elected to early adopt the new guidance in the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2016 on a
retrospective basis. while the guidance changes the manner in which deferred taxes are classified on the balance sheet, we are still required to offset deferred tax assets and liabilities for each taxpaying component within a tax jurisdiction.
adoption of the new standard impacted our previously reported results as follows:
(in millions)
june30, 2015
asadjusted
asreported
balance sheets:
current deferred income tax assets
$
$
1,915
other long-term assets
$
3,117
$
2,953
other current liabilities
$
6,555
$
6,766
long-term deferred income tax liabilities
$
1,295
$
2,835
recent accounting guidance not yet adopted  financial instruments  credit losses  in june 2016, the fasb issued a new standard to
replace the incurred loss impairment methodology in current gaap with a methodology that reflects expected credit losses and requires consideration of a broader range of reasonable and supportable information to inform credit loss estimates. for
trade and other receivables, loans, and other financial instruments, we will be required to use a forward-looking expected loss model rather than the incurred loss model for recognizing credit losses which reflects losses that are probable. credit
losses relating to available-for-sale debt securities will also be recorded through an allowance for credit losses rather than as a reduction in the amortized cost basis of the securities. the new standard will be effective for us beginning
july1, 2020, with early adoption permitted beginning july1, 2019. application of the amendments is through a cumulative-effect adjustment to retained earnings as of the effective date. we are currently evaluating the impact of this
standard on our consolidated financial statements.  leases  in february 2016, the fasb issued a new standard related to leases to increase transparency and comparability among organizations by requiring the recognition of lease assets and lease liabilities on the balance
sheet. most prominent among the amendments is the recognition of assets and liabilities by lessees for those leases classified as operating leases under previous u.s. gaap. under the new standard, disclosures are required to meet the objective of
enabling users of financial statements to assess the amount, timing, and uncertainty of cash flows arising from leases. we will be required to recognize and measure leases at the beginning of the earliest period presented using a modified
retrospective approach.  the new standard will be effective for us beginning july1, 2019, with early adoption permitted. we
currently anticipate early adoption of the new standard effective july1, 2017 in conjunction with our adoption of the new revenue standard.our ability to early adopt is dependent on system readiness, including software procured from
third-party providers, and the completion of our analysis of information necessary to restate prior period financial statements.
table of contents
part ii  item 8
we anticipate this standard will have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
while we are continuing to assess all potential impacts of the standard, we currently believe the most significant impact relates to our accounting for office, retail, and datacenter operating leases.
financial instruments  recognition, measurement, presentation, and disclosure
in january 2016, the fasb issued a new standard to amend certain aspects of recognition, measurement, presentation, and disclosure of financial
instruments. most prominent among the amendments is the requirement for changes in the fair value of our equity investments, with certain exceptions, to be recognized through net income rather than oci. the new standard will be effective for us
beginning july1, 2018. the application of the amendments will result in a cumulative-effect adjustment to our consolidated balance sheets as of the effective date. we are currently evaluating the impact of this standard on our consolidated
financial statements.  revenue from contracts with customers  in may 2014, the fasb issued a new standard related to revenue recognition. under the new standard, revenue is recognized when a customer obtains control of promised goods or services and is recognized in an amount
that reflects the consideration which the entity expects to receive in exchange for those goods or services. in addition, the standard requires disclosure of the nature, amount, timing, and uncertainty of revenue and cash flows arising from
contracts with customers. the fasb has recently issued several amendments to the standard, including clarification on accounting for licenses of intellectual property and identifying performance obligations.
the guidance permits two methods of adoption: retrospectively to each prior reporting period presented (full retrospective method), or
retrospectively with the cumulative effect of initially applying the guidance recognized at the date of initial application (the cumulative catch-up transition method). we currently anticipate adopting the standard using the full retrospective
method to restate each prior reporting period presented.  the new standard will be effective for us beginning july1, 2018, and
adoption as of the original effective date of july1, 2017 is permitted. we currently anticipate early adoption of the new standard effective july1, 2017. our ability to early adopt using the full retrospective method is dependent on
system readiness, including software procured from third-party providers, and the completion of our analysis of information necessary to restate prior period financial statements.
we anticipate this standard will have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements. while we are continuing to assess all potential
impacts of the standard, we currently believe the most significant impact relates to our accounting for software license revenue. we expect revenue related to hardware, cloud offerings, and professional services to remain substantially unchanged.
specifically, under the new standard we expect to recognize windows 10 revenue predominantly at the time of billing rather than ratably over the life of the related device. we also expect to recognize license revenue at the time of billing rather
than over the subscription period from certain multi-year commercial software subscriptions that include both software licenses and software assurance. due to the complexity of certain of our commercial license subscription contracts, the actual
revenue recognition treatment required under the standard will be dependent on contract-specific terms, and may vary in some instances from recognition at the time of billing.  we currently believe that the net change in windows 10 revenue from period to period is indicative of the net change in revenue we expect from the adoption of the new standard.
note 2  earnings per share  basic earnings per share (eps) is computed based on the weighted average number of shares of common stock outstanding during the period. diluted eps is computed based on the weighted average number of
shares of common stock plus the effect of dilutive potential common shares outstanding during the period using the treasury stock method. dilutive potential common shares include outstanding stock options and stock awards.
table of contents
part ii  item 8
the components of basic and diluted eps are as follows:
(in millions, except earnings per share)
year ended june30,
net income available for common shareholders (a)
$
16,798
$
12,193
$
22,074
weighted average outstanding shares of common stock (b)
7,925
8,177
8,299
dilutive effect of stock-based awards
common stock and common stock equivalents (c)
8,013
8,254
8,399
earnings per share
basic (a/b)
$
2.12
$
1.49
$
2.66
diluted (a/c)
$
2.10
$
1.48
$
2.63
anti-dilutive stock-based awards excluded from the calculations of diluted eps were immaterial during the periods
presented.  note 3  other income (expense), net  the components of other income (expense), net were as follows:
(in millions)
year ended june30,
dividends and interest income
$
$
$
interest expense
(1,243
)
(781
)
(597
)
net recognized gains on investments
net losses on derivatives
(443
)
(423
)
(328
)
net gains (losses) on foreign currency remeasurements
(121
)
(165
)
other
(195
)
(267
)
(169
)
total
$
(431
)
$
$
following are details of net recognized gains (losses) on investments during the periods reported:
(in millions)
year ended june30,
other-than-temporary impairments of investments
$
(322
)
$
(183
)
$
(106
)
realized gains from sales of available-for-sale securities
1,376
1,176
realized losses from sales of available-for-sale securities
(386
)
(277
)
(233
)
total
$
$
$
table of contents
part ii  item 8
note 4  investments  investment components  the components of investments, including associated derivatives, but
excluding held-to-maturity investments, were as follows:
(in millions)
costbasis
unrealized gains
unrealized losses
recorded basis
cash and cash equivalents
short-term investments
equity and other investments
june30, 2016
cash
$
3,501
$
$
$
3,501
$
3,501
$
$
mutual funds
1,012
1,012
1,012
commercial paper
certificates of deposit
1,000
1,000
u.s. government and agencysecurities
89,970
(11
)
90,204
90,104
foreign government bonds
5,502
(18
)
5,494
4,763
mortgage- and asset-backed securities
4,789
(2
)
4,808
4,808
corporate notes and bonds
6,509
(35
)
6,584
6,584
municipal securities
common and preferred stock
5,597
4,452
(236
)
9,813
9,813
other investments
(3
)
total
$
119,053
$
4,895
$
(302
)
$
123,646
$
6,510
$
106,730
$
10,406
(in millions)
costbasis
unrealized gains
unrealized losses
recorded basis
cash and cash equivalents
short-term investments
equity and other investments
june30, 2015
cash
$
3,679
$
$
$
3,679
$
3,679
$
$
mutual funds
1,100
1,100
1,100
commercial paper
certificates of deposit
u.s. government and agencysecurities
72,843
(30
)
72,889
72,850
foreign government bonds
5,477
(24
)
5,456
5,456
mortgage- and asset-backed securities
4,899
(6
)
4,916
4,916
corporate notes and bonds
7,192
(37
)
7,252
7,252
municipal securities
(1
)
common and preferred stock
6,668
4,986
(215
)
11,439
11,439
other investments
total
$
103,647
$
5,220
$
(313
)
$
108,554
$
5,595
$
90,931
$
12,028
as of june30, 2016 and 2015, the recorded bases of common and preferred stock that are restricted for more
than one year or are not publicly traded were $767 million and $561 million, respectively. these investments are carried at cost and are reviewed quarterly for indicators of other-than-temporary impairment. it is not practicable for us to reliably
estimate the fair value of these investments.  as of june30, 2016 and 2015, the collateral received under agreements for loaned
securities totaled $294 million and $92 million, which is primarily comprised of u.s. government and agency securities.
table of contents
part ii  item 8
unrealized losses on investments  investments with continuous unrealized losses for less than 12 months and 12 months or greater and their related fair values were as follows:
less than 12 months
12 months or greater
totalunrealizedlosses
(in millions)
fairvalue
unrealizedlosses
fairvalue
unrealizedlosses
total fairvalue
june30, 2016
u.s. government and agency securities
$
5,816
$
(3
)
$
$
(8
)
$
6,248
$
(11
)
foreign government bonds
3,452
(3
)
(15
)
3,487
(18
)
mortgage- and asset-backed securities
(1
)
(1
)
1,166
(2
)
corporate notes and bonds
1,180
(11
)
(24
)
1,968
(35
)
common and preferred stock
(147
)
(89
)
1,286
(236
)
total
$
12,188
$
(165
)
$
1,967
$
(137
)
$
14,155
$
(302
)
less than 12 months
12 months or greater
totalunrealizedlosses
(in millions)
fairvalue
unrealizedlosses
fairvalue
unrealizedlosses
total fairvalue
june30, 2015
u.s. government and agency securities
$
6,636
$
(9
)
$
$
(21
)
$
7,057
$
(30
)
foreign government bonds
4,611
(12
)
(12
)
4,629
(24
)
mortgage- and asset-backed securities
3,171
(5
)
(1
)
3,199
(6
)
corporate notes and bonds
2,946
(29
)
(8
)
3,050
(37
)
municipal securities
(1
)
(1
)
common and preferred stock
1,389
(180
)
(35
)
1,537
(215
)
total
$
18,789
$
(236
)
$
$
(77
)
$
19,508
$
(313
)
unrealized losses from fixed-income securities are primarily attributable to changes in interest rates. unrealized
losses from domestic and international equities are due to market price movements. management does not believe any remaining unrealized losses represent other-than-temporary impairments based on our evaluation of available evidence.
debt investment maturities
(in millions)
costbasis
estimated fairvalue
june30, 2016
due in one year or less
$
54,503
$
54,544
due after one year through five years
50,683
50,896
due after five years through 10 years
1,914
1,954
due after 10 years
1,253
1,336
total
$
108,353
$
108,730
note 5  derivatives  we use derivative instruments to manage risks related to foreign currencies, equity prices, interest rates, and credit; to enhance investment returns; and to facilitate portfolio diversification. our objectives for
holding derivatives include reducing, eliminating, and efficiently managing the economic impact of these exposures as effectively as possible.  our derivative programs include strategies that both qualify and do not qualify for hedge accounting treatment. all notional amounts presented below are measured in u.s. dollar equivalents.
table of contents
part ii  item 8
foreign currency  certain forecasted transactions, assets, and liabilities are exposed to foreign currency risk. we monitor our foreign currency exposures daily to maximize the economic effectiveness of our foreign currency hedge
positions. option and forward contracts are used to hedge a portion of forecasted international revenue for up to three years in the future and are designated as cash flow hedging instruments. principal currencies hedged include the euro, japanese
yen, british pound, canadian dollar, and australian dollar. as of june30, 2016 and june30, 2015, the total notional amounts of these foreign exchange contracts sold were $8.4 billion and $9.8 billion, respectively.
foreign currency risks related to certain non-u.s. dollar denominated securities are hedged using foreign exchange forward contracts that are
designated as fair value hedging instruments. as of june30, 2016 and june30, 2015, the total notional amounts of these foreign exchange contracts sold were $5.3 billion for both periods.
certain options and forwards not designated as hedging instruments are also used to manage the variability in foreign exchange rates on certain
balance sheet amounts and to manage other foreign currency exposures.as of june30, 2016, the total notional amounts of these foreign exchange contracts purchased and sold were $12.0 billion and $11.7 billion, respectively. as of
june30, 2015, the total notional amounts of these foreign exchange contracts purchased and sold were $9.7 billion and $11.0 billion, respectively.
equity  securities held in our equity and
other investments portfolio are subject to market price risk.market price risk is managed relative to broad-based global and domestic equity indices using certain convertible preferred investments, options, futures, and swap contracts not
designated as hedging instruments. from time to time, to hedge our price risk, we may use and designate equity derivatives as hedging instruments, including puts, calls, swaps, and forwards.as of june30, 2016, the total notional amounts
of equity contracts purchased and sold for managing market price risk were $1.3 billion and $2.2 billion, respectively, of which $737 million and $986 million, respectively, were designated as hedging instruments. as of june30, 2015, the total
notional amounts of equity contracts purchased and sold for managing market price risk were $2.2 billion and $2.6 billion, respectively, of which $1.1 billion and $1.4 billion, respectively, were designated as hedging instruments.
interest rate  securities held in our
fixed-income portfolio are subject to different interest rate risks based on their maturities. we manage the average maturity of our fixed-income portfolio to achieve economic returns that correlate to certain broad-based fixed-income indices using
exchange-traded option and futures contracts, and over-the-counter swap and option contracts, none of which are designated as hedging instruments. as of june30, 2016, the total notional amounts of fixed-interest rate contracts purchased and
sold were $328 million and $2.4 billion, respectively. as of june30, 2015, the total notional amounts of fixed-interest rate contracts purchased and sold were $1.0 billion and $3.2 billion, respectively.
in addition, we use to be announced forward purchase commitments of mortgage-backed assets to gain exposure to agency mortgage-backed
securities.these meet the definition of a derivative instrument in cases where physical delivery of the assets is not taken at the earliest available delivery date. as of june30, 2016 and 2015, the total notional derivative amounts of
mortgage contracts purchased were $548 million and $812 million, respectively.  credit
our fixed-income portfolio is diversified and consists primarily of investment-grade securities. we use credit default swap contracts, not
designated as hedging instruments, to manage credit exposures relative to broad-based indices and to facilitate portfolio diversification. we use credit default swaps as they are a low-cost method of managing exposure to individual credit risks or
groups of credit risks. as of june30, 2016, the total notional amounts of credit contracts purchased and sold were $440 million and $273 million, respectively. as of june30, 2015, the total notional amounts of credit contracts purchased
and sold were $618 million and $430 million, respectively.
table of contents
part ii  item 8
commodity  we use broad-based commodity exposures to enhance portfolio returns and to facilitate portfolio diversification. we use swaps, futures, and option contracts, not designated as hedging instruments, to generate and
manage exposures to broad-based commodity indices. we use derivatives on commodities as they can be low-cost alternatives to the purchase and storage of a variety of commodities, including, but not limited to, precious metals, energy, and grain. as
of june30, 2016, the total notional amounts of commodity contracts purchased and sold were $631 million and $162 million, respectively. as of june30, 2015, the total notional amounts of commodity contracts purchased and sold were $882
million and $316 million, respectively.  credit-risk-related contingent features
certain of our counterparty agreements for derivative instruments contain provisions that require our issued and outstanding long-term unsecured
debt to maintain an investment grade credit rating and require us to maintain minimum liquidity of $1.0 billion. to the extent we fail to meet these requirements, we will be required to post collateral, similar to the standard convention related to
over-the-counter derivatives. as of june30, 2016, our long-term unsecured debt rating was aaa, and cash investments were in excess of $1.0 billion. as a result, no collateral was required to be posted.
table of contents
part ii  item 8
fair values of derivative instruments
the following table presents the fair values of derivative instruments designated as hedging instruments (designated hedge derivatives)
and not designated as hedging instruments (non-designated hedge derivatives). the fair values exclude the impact of netting derivative assets and liabilities when a legally enforceable master netting agreement exists and fair value
adjustments related to our own credit risk and counterparty credit risk:
june30, 2016
june30, 2015
assets
liabilities
assets
liabilities
(inmillions)
short-terminvestments
othercurrentassets
equityandotherinvestments
othercurrentliabilities
short-terminvestments
othercurrentassets
equityandotherinvestments
othercurrentliabilities
non-designated hedge derivatives
foreign exchange contracts
$
$
$
$
(296
)
$
$
$
$
(79
)
equity contracts
(16
)
(18
)
interest rate contracts
(25
)
(12
)
credit contracts
(5
)
(9
)
commodity contracts
total
$
$
$
$
(342
)
$
$
$
$
(118
)
designated hedge derivatives
foreign exchange contracts
$
$
$
$
(263
)
$
$
$
$
(31
)
equity contracts
(25
)
(69
)
total
$
$
$
$
(288
)
$
$
$
$
(100
)
total gross amounts of derivatives
$
$
$
$
(630
)
$
$
$
$
(218
)
gross derivatives either offset or subject to an enforceable master netting agreement
$
$
$
$
(630
)
$
$
$
$
(218
)
gross amounts of derivatives offset in the balance sheet
(74
)
(302
)
(25
)
(66
)
(71
)
(25
)
net amounts presented in the balance sheet
(5
)
(7
)
(232
)
(57
)
gross amounts of derivatives not offset in the balance sheet
cash collateral received
(250
)
(456
)
net amount
$
(5
)
$
$
(7
)
$
(482
)
$
$
$
$
(513
)
see also note 4  investments and note6 fair value measurements.
table of contents
part ii  item 8
fair value hedge gains (losses)  we recognized in other income (expense), net the following gains (losses) on contracts designated as fair value hedges and their related hedged items:
(in millions)
year ended june30,
foreign exchange contracts
derivatives
$
(797
)
$
$
(14
)
hedged items
(725
)
total amount of ineffectiveness
$
$
$
(8
)
equity contracts
derivatives
$
(76
)
$
(107
)
$
(110
)
hedged items
total amount of ineffectiveness
$
$
$
amount of equity contracts excluded from effectiveness assessment
$
(10
)
$
$
(9
)
cash flow hedge gains (losses)  we recognized the following gains (losses) on foreign exchange contracts designated as cash flow hedges:
(in millions)
year ended june30,
effective portion
gains recognized in oci (net of tax effects of $24, $35 and $2)
$
$
1,152
$
gains reclassified from aoci into revenue
$
$
$
amount excluded from effectiveness assessment and ineffective portion
losses recognized in other income (expense), net
$
(354
)
$
(346
)
$
(239
)
we estimate that $319 million of net derivative gains included in aoci as of june30, 2016 will be
reclassified into earnings within the following 12 months. no significant amounts of gains (losses) were reclassified from aoci into earnings as a result of forecasted transactions that failed to occur during fiscal year 2016.
non-designated derivative gains (losses)
gains (losses) from changes in fair values of derivatives that are not designated as hedges are primarily recognized in other income (expense),
net. these amounts are shown in the table below, with the exception of gains (losses) on derivatives presented in income statement line items other than other income (expense), net, which were immaterial for the periods presented. other than those
derivatives entered into for investment purposes, such as commodity contracts, the gains (losses) below are generally economically offset by unrealized gains (losses) in the underlying available-for-sale securities and gains (losses) from foreign
exchange rate changes on certain balance sheet amounts.
(in millions)
year ended june30,
foreign exchange contracts
$
(55
)
$
(483
)
$
(78
)
equity contracts
(21
)
(19
)
(64
)
interest-rate contracts
credit contracts
(1
)
(1
)
commodity contracts
(87
)
(223
)
total
$
(154
)
$
(703
)
$
(34
)
table of contents
part ii  item 8
note 6  fair value measurements
assets and liabilities measured at fair value on a recurring basis
the following tables present the fair value of our financial instruments that are measured at fair value on a recurring basis:
(in millions)
level 1
level 2
level3
gross fair value
netting(a)
netfairvalue
june30, 2016
assets
mutual funds
$
1,012
$
$
$
1,012
$
$
1,012
commercial paper
certificates of deposit
1,000
1,000
1,000
u.s. government and agency securities
86,492
3,707
90,199
90,199
foreign government bonds
5,705
5,715
5,715
mortgage- and asset-backed securities
4,803
4,803
4,803
corporate notes and bonds
6,361
6,362
6,362
municipal securities
common and preferred stock
6,918
2,114
9,050
9,050
derivatives
(401
)
total
$
94,438
$
24,963
$
$
119,420
$
(401
)
$
119,019
liabilities
derivatives and other
$
$
$
$
$
(398
)
$
(in millions)
level 1
level 2
level3
gross fair
value
netting
(a)
netfairvalue
june30, 2015
assets
mutual funds
$
1,100
$
$
$
1,100
$
$
1,100
commercial paper
certificates of deposit
u.s. government and agency securities
71,930
72,885
72,885
foreign government bonds
5,299
5,430
5,430
mortgage- and asset-backed securities
4,917
4,917
4,917
corporate notes and bonds
7,108
7,109
7,109
municipal securities
common and preferred stock
8,585
2,277
10,876
10,876
derivatives
(162
)
total
$
81,750
$
22,761
$
$
104,531
$
(162
)
$
104,369
liabilities
derivatives and other
$
$
$
$
$
(161
)
$
(a)
these amounts represent the impact of netting derivative assets and derivative liabilities when a legally enforceable master netting agreement exists and
fair value adjustments related to our own credit risk and counterparty credit risk.  the changes in our level 3
financial instruments that are measured at fair value on a recurring basis were immaterial during the periods presented.
table of contents
part ii  item 8
the following table reconciles the total net fair value of assets above to our balance
sheet presentation of these same assets in note 4  investments.
(in millions)
june30,
net fair value of assets measured at fair value on a recurring basis
$
119,019
$
104,369
cash
3,501
3,679
common and preferred stock measured at fair value on a nonrecurring basis
other investments measured at fair value on a nonrecurring basis
less derivative net assets classified as other current assets
(246
)
(648
)
other
recorded basis of investment components
$
123,646
$
108,554
financial assets and liabilities measured at fair value on a nonrecurring basis
during fiscal year 2016 and 2015, we did not record any material other-than-temporary impairments on financial assets required to be measured at
fair value on a nonrecurring basis.
note 7  inventories
the components of inventories were as follows:
(in millions)
june30,
raw materials
$
$
1,100
work in process
finished goods
1,481
1,600
total
$
2,251
$
2,902
note 8  property and equipment
the components of property and equipment were as follows:
(in millions)
june30,
land
$
$
buildings and improvements
12,393
10,800
leasehold improvements
3,659
3,577
computer equipment and software
17,391
13,612
furniture and equipment
3,889
3,579
total, at cost
38,156
32,337
accumulated depreciation
(19,800
)
(17,606
)
total, net
$
18,356
$
14,731
during fiscal years 2016, 2015, and 2014, depreciation expense was $4.9 billion, $4.1 billion, and $3.4 billion,
respectively.
table of contents
part ii  item 8
note 9  business combinations
mojang synergies ab  on
november6, 2014, we acquired mojang synergies ab (mojang), the swedish video game developer of the minecraft gaming franchise, for $2.5 billion in cash, net of cash acquired. the addition of minecraft and its community enhances our
gaming portfolio across windows, xbox, and other ecosystems besides our own. the significant classes of assets and liabilities to which we allocated the purchase price were goodwill of $1.8 billion and identifiable intangible assets of $928 million,
primarily marketing-related (trade names). the goodwill recognized in connection with the acquisition is primarily attributable to anticipated synergies from future growth, and is not expected to be deductible for tax purposes. we assigned the
goodwill to more personal computing under our current segment structure. identifiable intangible assets were assigned a total weighted-average amortization period of 6.3 years. mojang has been included in our consolidated results of operations since
the acquisition date.  nokias devices and services business  on april25, 2014, we acquired substantially all of nokia corporations (nokia) devices and services business (nds) for a total purchase price of $9.4 billion, including cash
acquired of $1.5 billion (the acquisition). the purchase price consisted primarily of cash of $7.1 billion and nokias repurchase of convertible notes of $2.1 billion, which was a non-cash transaction, and liabilities assumed of
$0.2 billion. the acquisition was expected to accelerate the growth of our devices business through faster innovation, synergies, and unified branding and marketing.  the allocation of the purchase price to goodwill was completed as of march31, 2015. the major classes of assets and liabilities to which we allocated the purchase price were as follows:
(in millions)
cash
$
1,506
accounts
receivable(a)
inventories
other current assets
property and equipment
intangible assets
4,509
goodwill(b)
5,456
other
current liabilities
(4,575
)
long-term liabilities
(890
)
total purchase price
$
9,442
(a)
gross accounts receivable was $901 million, of which $147 million was expected to be uncollectible.
(b)
goodwill was assigned to more personal computing under our current segment structure. the goodwill was primarily attributed to increased synergies that
were expected to be achieved from the integration of nds.  following are the details of the purchase price allocated to the
intangible assets acquired:
(in millions)
amount
weighted averagelife
technology-based
$
2,493
9years
contract-based
1,500
9years
customer-related
3years
marketing-related (trade names)
2years
fair value of intangible assets acquired
$
4,509
8years
table of contents
part ii  item 8
during the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2016, we recorded $630 million of intangible and fixed
asset impairment charges, and during the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2015, we recorded $7.5 billion of goodwill and asset impairment charges. the impairment charges for both periods related to our phone business. these costs are included in
impairment, integration, and restructuring expenses on our consolidated income statement. see note10  goodwill and note 11  intangible assets for additional details.
in may 2016, we announced an agreement to sell our entry-level feature phone assets for $350 million. the transaction is expected to close in the
second half of calendar year 2016, subject to regulatory approvals and other closing conditions.  our consolidated income statement for
fiscal year 2014 included revenue and operating loss of $2.0 billion and $692 million, respectively, attributable to nds since the acquisition.  following are the supplemental consolidated results of microsoft corporation on an unaudited pro forma basis, as if the acquisition had been consummated on july1, 2012:
(in millions, except per share amounts)
year ended june30,
revenue
$
96,248
net income
$
20,234
diluted earnings per share
$
2.41
these pro forma results were based on estimates and assumptions, which we believe are reasonable. they are not the
results that would have been realized had we been a combined company during the periods presented and are not necessarily indicative of our consolidated results of operations in future periods. the pro forma results include adjustments primarily
related to purchase accounting adjustments and the elimination of related party transactions between microsoft and nds. acquisition costs and other nonrecurring charges incurred are included in the earliest period presented.
during the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2014, we incurred $21 million of acquisition costs associated with the purchase of nds. acquisition costs
are primarily comprised of transaction fees and direct acquisition costs, including legal, finance, consulting, and other professional fees. these costs are included in impairment, integration, and restructuring expenses on our consolidated income
statement for fiscal year 2014.  certain concurrent transactions were recognized separately from the acquisition. prior to the
acquisition, we had joint strategic initiatives with nokia; this contractual relationship was terminated in conjunction with the acquisition. no gain or loss was recorded upon termination of this agreement, as it was determined to be at market
value. in addition, we agreed to license nokias mapping services and will pay nokia separately for the services provided under a four-year license as they are rendered.  other  during fiscal year 2016, we completed 17 acquisitions for total cash consideration of
$1.4 billion. these entities have been included in our consolidated results of operations since their respective acquisition dates.  pro
forma results of operations for mojang and our other acquisitions during the current period have not been presented because the effects of these business combinations, individually and in aggregate, were not material to our consolidated results of
operations.
table of contents
part ii  item 8
note 10  goodwill
changes in the carrying amount of goodwill were as follows:
(in millions)
june30, 2014
acquisitions
other
june30, 2015
acquisitions
other
june30,2016
productivity and business processes
$
6,116
$
$
(183
)
$
6,309
$
$
(74
)
$
6,678
intelligent cloud
4,631
(5
)
4,917
5,467
more personal computing
9,380
1,788
(5,455
)
5,713
(86
)
5,727
total goodwill
$
20,127
$
2,455
$
(5,643
)
$
16,939
$
1,092
$
(159
)
$
17,872
the measurement periods for the valuation of assets acquired and liabilities assumed end as soon as information on
the facts and circumstances that existed as of the acquisition dates becomes available, but do not exceed 12 months. adjustments in purchase price allocations may require a recasting of the amounts allocated to goodwill retroactive to the periods in
which the acquisitions occurred.  any change in the goodwill amounts resulting from foreign currency translations and purchase
accounting adjustments are presented as other in the above table. also included in other are business dispositions and transfers between business segments due to reorganizations, as applicable. for fiscal year 2015, a $5.1
billion goodwill impairment charge was included in other, as discussed below. this goodwill impairment charge was included in impairment, integration, and restructuring expenses on our consolidated income statement, and reflected in
corporate and other in our table of operating income (loss) by segment in note 21  segment information and geographic data.  our
accumulated goodwill impairment as of both june30, 2016 and 2015 was $11.3 billion.  as discussed in note 21  segment
information and geographic data, during the first quarter of fiscal year 2016 our chief operating decision maker requested changes in the information that he regularly reviews for purposes of allocating resources and assessing performance. this
resulted in a change in our operating segments and reporting units. we allocated goodwill to our new reporting units using a relative fair value approach. in addition, we completed an assessment of any potential goodwill impairment for all reporting
units immediately prior to the reallocation and determined that no impairment existed.  goodwill impairment
we test goodwill for impairment annually on may1 at the reporting unit level, primarily using a discounted cash flow methodology with a
peer-based, risk-adjusted weighted average cost of capital. we believe use of a discounted cash flow approach is the most reliable indicator of the fair values of the businesses.
no instances of impairment were identified in our may1, 2016 test.  upon completion of the annual testing as of may1, 2015, our previous phone hardware reporting unit goodwill was determined to be impaired. phone hardware goodwill is included in the devices reporting unit
within more personal computing under our current segment structure. in the second half of fiscal year 2015, phone hardware did not meet its sales volume and revenue goals, and the mix of units sold had lower margins than planned. these results,
along with changes in the competitive marketplace and an evaluation of business priorities, led to a shift in strategic direction and reduced future revenue and profitability expectations for the business. as a result of these changes in strategy
and expectations, we forecasted reductions in unit volume growth rates and lower future cash flows used to estimate the fair value of the phone hardware reporting unit, which resulted in the determination that an impairment adjustment was required.
because our annual test indicated that phone hardwares carrying value exceeded its estimated fair value, a second phase of the
goodwill impairment test (step 2) was performed specific to phone hardware. under step 2, the fair value of all phone hardware assets and liabilities were estimated, including tangible assets, existing technology,
table of contents
part ii  item 8
patent agreements, and contractual arrangements, for the purpose of deriving an estimate of the implied fair value of goodwill. the implied fair value of the goodwill was then compared to the
recorded goodwill to determine the amount of the impairment. assumptions used in measuring the value of these assets and liabilities included the discount rates and royalty rates used in valuing the intangible assets, and consideration of the market
environment in valuing the tangible assets.  no other instances of impairment were identified in our may1, 2015 test.
note 11  intangible assets  the
components of intangible assets, all of which are finite-lived, were as follows:
(in millions)
grosscarryingamount
accumulatedamortization
netcarryingamount
grosscarryingamount
accumulatedamortization
netcarryingamount
june30,
technology-based(a)
$
5,970
$
(3,648
)
$
2,322
$
5,926
$
(3,149
)
$
2,777
marketing-related
1,869
(616
)
1,253
1,942
(508
)
1,434
contract-based
(718
)
1,192
(710
)
customer-related
(385
)
(350
)
total
$
9,100
$
(5,367
)
$
3,733
$
9,552
$
(4,717
)
$
4,835
(a)
technology-based intangible assets included $115 million and $116 million as of june30, 2016 and 2015, respectively, of net carrying amount of
software to be sold, leased, or otherwise marketed.  in the third quarter of fiscal year 2016, we corrected our
intangible assets in the table above for a $585 million misstatement between gross carrying amount and accumulated amortization as of june30, 2015. we do not consider this correction to be material, and there was no impact to our consolidated
financial statements.  during fiscal year 2016, we recorded impairment charges of $480 million related to intangible assets in the
devices reporting unit within our more personal computing segment. in the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2016, we tested these intangible assets for recoverability due to changes in facts and circumstances associated with the shift in strategic
direction and reduced profitability expectations for our phone business. based on the results of our testing, we determined that the carrying value of the intangible assets was not recoverable, and an impairment charge was recorded to the extent
that estimated fair value exceeded carrying value. we primarily used the income approach to determine the fair value of the intangible assets and determine the amount of impairment.
during fiscal year 2015, we recorded impairment charges of $2.2 billion related to intangible assets in our previous phone hardware reporting unit.
phone hardware intangible assets are included in the devices reporting unit under our current segment structure. in the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2015, we tested these intangible assets for recoverability due to changes in facts and
circumstances associated with the shift in strategic direction and reduced profitability expectations for phone hardware. based on the results of our testing, we determined that the carrying value of the intangible assets was not recoverable, and an
impairment charge was recorded to the extent that estimated fair value exceeded carrying value. we primarily used a relief from royalty income approach to determine the fair value of the intangible assets and determine the amount of impairment.
these intangible assets impairment charges were included in impairment, integration, and restructuring expenses on our consolidated
income statement, and reflected in corporate and other in our table of operating income (loss) by segment in note 21  segment information and geographic data.  we estimate that we have no significant residual value related to our intangible assets.
table of contents
part ii  item 8
the components of intangible assets acquired during the periods presented were as follows:
(in millions)
amount
weighted averagelife
amount
weighted averagelife
year ended june30,
technology-based
$
4years
$
5years
marketing-related
1year
8years
customer-related
3years
4years
total
$
4years
$
1,454
6years
intangible assets amortization expense was $978 million, $1.3 billion, and $845 million for fiscal years 2016,
2015, and 2014, respectively. amortization of capitalized software was $69 million, $79 million, and $200 million for fiscal years 2016, 2015, and 2014, respectively.  the following table outlines the estimated future amortization expense related to intangible assets held as of june30, 2016:
(in millions)
year ending june30,
$
thereafter
total
$
3,733
note 12  debt
short-term debt  as of
june30, 2016, we had $12.9 billion of commercial paper issued and outstanding, with a weighted-average interest rate of 0.43% and maturities ranging from 1 day to 99 days. as of june30, 2015, we had $5.0 billion of commercial paper
issued and outstanding, with a weighted-average interest rate of 0.11% and maturities ranging from 8 days to 63 days. the estimated fair value of this commercial paper approximates its carrying value.
we have two $5.0 billion credit facilities that expire on november1, 2016 and november14, 2018, respectively. these credit facilities
serve as a back-up for our commercial paper program. as of june30, 2016, we were in compliance with the only financial covenant in both credit agreements, which requires us to maintain a coverage ratio of at least three times earnings before
interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization to interest expense, as defined in the credit agreements. no amounts were drawn against these credit facilities during any of the periods presented.
long-term debt  as of june30, 2016,
the total carrying value and estimated fair value of our long-term debt were $40.8 billion and $44.0 billion, respectively. this is compared to a carrying value and estimated fair value of our long-term debt, including the current portion, of $30.3
billion and $30.5 billion, respectively, as of june30, 2015. these estimated fair values are based on level 2 inputs.
table of contents
part ii  item 8
the components of our long-term debt, including the current portion, and the associated interest
rates were as follows as of june30, 2016 and 2015:
due date
facevalue june30, 2016
facevalue june30, 2015
stated interest rate
effective interest rate
(inmillions)
notes
september25,2015
$
*
$
1,750
1.625%
1.795%
february8, 2016
*
2.500%
2.642%
november15, 2017
0.875%
1.084%
may1, 2018
1.000%
1.106%
november3, 2018(a)
1,750
*
1.300%
1.396%
december6, 2018
1,250
1,250
1.625%
1.824%
june1, 2019
1,000
1,000
4.200%
4.379%
february12, 2020
1,500
1,500
1.850%
1.935%
october1, 2020
1,000
1,000
3.000%
3.137%
november3, 2020(a)
2,250
*
2.000%
2.093%
february8, 2021
4.000%
4.082%
december6, 2021(b)
1,944
1,950
2.125%
2.233%
february12, 2022
1,500
1,500
2.375%
2.466%
november3, 2022(a)
1,000
*
2.650%
2.717%
november15, 2022
2.125%
2.239%
may1, 2023
1,000
1,000
2.375%
2.465%
december15, 2023
1,500
1,500
3.625%
3.726%
february12, 2025
2,250
2,250
2.700%
2.772%
november3, 2025(a)
3,000
*
3.125%
3.176%
december6, 2028(b)
1,944
1,950
3.125%
3.218%
may2,
2033(b)
2.625%
2.690%
february12, 2035
1,500
1,500
3.500%
3.604%
november3, 2035(a)
1,000
*
4.200%
4.260%
june1, 2039
5.200%
5.240%
october1, 2040
1,000
1,000
4.500%
4.567%
february8, 2041
1,000
1,000
5.300%
5.361%
november15, 2042
3.500%
3.571%
may1, 2043
3.750%
3.829%
december15, 2043
4.875%
4.918%
february12, 2045
1,750
1,750
3.750%
3.800%
november3, 2045(a)
3,000
*
4.450%
4.492%
february12, 2055
2,250
2,250
4.000%
4.063%
november3, 2055(a)
1,000
*
4.750%
4.782%
total
$
40,949
$
30,463
(a)
in november 2015, we issued $13.0 billion of debt securities.
(b)
euro-denominated debt securities.
*
not applicable  the
notes in the table above are senior unsecured obligations and rank equally with our other senior unsecured debt outstanding. interest on these notes is paid semi-annually, except for the euro-denominated debt securities on which interest is paid
annually. cash paid for interest on our debt for fiscal years 2016, 2015, and 2014 was $1.1 billion, $620 million, and $509 million, respectively. as of june30, 2016 and 2015, the aggregate unamortized discount for our long-term debt,
including the current portion, was $166 million and $156 million, respectively.
table of contents
part ii  item 8
maturities of our long-term debt for each of the next five years and thereafter are as follows:
(in millions)
year ending june30,
$
1,050
4,000
1,500
3,750
thereafter
30,649
total
$
40,949
note 13  income taxes  the components of the provision for income taxes were as follows:
(in millions)
year ended june30,
current taxes
u.s. federal
$
$
3,661
$
3,738
u.s. state and local
foreign
1,940
2,065
2,073
current taxes
2,621
6,090
6,077
deferred taxes
deferred taxes
(331
)
provision for income taxes
$
2,953
$
6,314
$
5,746
u.s. and foreign components of income (loss) before income taxes were as follows:
(in millions)
year ended june30,
u.s.
$
(325
)
$
7,363
$
7,127
foreign
20,076
11,144
20,693
income before income taxes
$
19,751
$
18,507
$
27,820
in fiscal year 2016, income before income taxes included the net impact of u.s. and foreign revenue deferrals
related to the sales of windows 10 of $6.0 billion and $588 million, respectively. in fiscal year 2015, income before income taxes included the net impact of u.s. and foreign impairment, integration, and restructuring expenses relating to our phone
business of $1.1 billion and $8.9 billion, respectively.  the items accounting for the difference between income taxes computed at the
u.s. federal statutory rate and our effective rate were as follows:
year ended june30,
federal statutory rate
35.0%
35.0%
35.0%
effect of:
foreign earnings taxed at lower rates
(19.4)%
(20.9)%
(17.1)%
phone nondeductible charges and valuation allowance
1.3%
19.1%
0.9%
domestic production activities deduction
(0.6)%
(2.4)%
(1.0)%
excess tax benefits relating to stock-based compensation
(2.0)%
0%
0%
other reconciling items, net
0.7%
3.3%
2.9%
effective rate
15.0%
34.1%
20.7%
table of contents
part ii  item 8
the reduction from the federal statutory rate is primarily due to earnings taxed at lower rates in
foreign jurisdictions resulting from producing and distributing our products and services through our foreign regional operations centers in ireland, singapore, and puerto rico. our foreign regional operating centers, which are taxed at rates lower
than the u.s. rate, generated 69%, 73%, and 81% of our foreign income before tax in fiscal years 2016, 2015, and 2014, respectively. in general, other reconciling items consist of interest, u.s. state income taxes, and credits. in fiscal years 2016,
2015, and 2014, there were no individually significant other reconciling items.  the decrease in our effective tax rate for fiscal year
2016 compared to fiscal year 2015 was primarily due to changes in the mix of our income before income taxes between the u.s. and foreign countries, including the net impact of revenue deferrals related to sales of windows 10, tax benefits from the
adoption of the new accounting guidance relating to stock-based compensation, and distributions from foreign affiliates. the fiscal year 2015 effective tax rate included the tax impact of losses in foreign jurisdictions for which we may not realize
a tax benefit, primarily as a result of impairment and restructuring charges.  the components of the deferred income tax assets and
liabilities were as follows:
(in millions)
june30,
deferred income tax assets
stock-based compensation expense
$
$
other expense items
1,609
1,531
restructuring charges
unearned revenue
impaired investments
loss carryforwards
1,703
1,158
depreciation and amortization
other revenue items
deferred income tax assets
5,329
5,415
less valuation allowance
(2,180
)
(2,265
)
deferred income tax assets, net of valuation allowance
$
3,149
$
3,150
deferred income tax liabilities
foreign earnings
$
(1,242
)
$
(1,280
)
unrealized gain on investments and debt
(2,102
)
(2,223
)
depreciation and amortization
(1,008
)
(685
)
other
(54
)
(29
)
deferred income tax liabilities
(4,406
)
(4,217
)
net deferred income tax assets (liabilities)
$
(1,257
)
$
(1,067
)
reported as
other long-term assets
(a)
$
$
long-term deferred income tax liabilities (a)
(1,476
)
(1,295
)
net deferred income tax assets (liabilities) (a)
$
(1,257
)
$
(1,067
)
(a)
balances as of june30, 2015 reflect the impact of the adoption of the new accounting standard in fiscal year 2016 related to balance sheet
classification of deferred taxes. see note 1  accounting policies for additional details.  as of
june30, 2016, we had net operating loss carryforwards of $8.0 billion, including $6.3 billion of foreign net operating loss carryforwards. the valuation allowance disclosed in the table above relates to the foreign net operating loss
carryforwards and other net deferred tax assets that may not be realized.
table of contents
part ii  item 8
deferred income tax balances reflect the effects of temporary differences between the carrying
amounts of assets and liabilities and their tax bases and are stated at enacted tax rates expected to be in effect when the taxes are actually paid or recovered.  as of june30, 2016, we have not provided deferred u.s. income taxes or foreign withholding taxes on temporary differences of approximately $124.0 billion resulting from earnings for certain non-u.s.
subsidiaries which are permanently reinvested outside the u.s. the unrecognized deferred tax liability associated with these temporary differences was approximately $39.3 billion as of june30, 2016.
income taxes paid were $3.9 billion, $4.4 billion, and $5.5 billion in fiscal years 2016, 2015, and 2014, respectively.
tax contingencies and other income tax liabilities were $11.8 billion and $12.1 billion as of june30, 2016 and 2015, respectively, and are
included in other long-term liabilities. this decrease relates primarily to tax credits available for carryover and a partial settlement of the irs audit for tax years 2007 to 2009, offset by increases relating to intercompany transfer pricing.
uncertain tax positions
unrecognized tax benefits as of june30, 2016, 2015, and 2014, were $10.2 billion, $9.6 billion, and $8.7 billion, respectively. if
recognized, these tax benefits would affect our effective tax rates for fiscal years 2016, 2015, and 2014, by $8.8 billion, $7.9 billion, and $7.0 billion, respectively.  as of june30, 2016, 2015, and 2014, we had accrued interest expense related to uncertain tax positions of $1.9 billion, $1.7 billion, and $1.5 billion, respectively, net of federal income tax benefits.
interest expense on unrecognized tax benefits was $163 million, $237 million, and $235 million in fiscal years 2016, 2015, and 2014, respectively, and was included in provision for income taxes.
the aggregate changes in the balance of unrecognized tax benefits were as follows:
(in millions)
year ended june30,
balance, beginning of year
$
9,599
$
8,714
$
8,648
decreases related to settlements
(201
)
(50
)
(583
)
increases for tax positions related to the current year
1,086
1,091
increases for tax positions related to prior years
decreases for tax positions related to prior years
(317
)
(144
)
(95
)
decreases due to lapsed statutes of limitations
(118
)
(106
)
(39
)
balance, end of year
$
10,164
$
9,599
$
8,714
while we settled a portion of our irs audit for tax years 2004 to 2006 during the third quarter of fiscal year
2011, and settled a portion of the irs audit for tax years 2007 to 2009 during the first quarter of fiscal year 2016, we remain under audit for those years. in february 2012, the irs withdrew its 2011 revenue agents report for tax years 2004 to 2006
and reopened the audit phase of the examination. as of june30, 2016, the primary unresolved issue relates to transfer pricing, which could have a significant impact on our consolidated financial statements if not resolved favorably. we believe
our allowances for income tax contingencies are adequate. we have not received a proposed assessment for the unresolved issues and do not expect a final resolution of these issues in the next 12 months.based on the information currently
available, we do not anticipate a significant increase or decrease to our tax contingencies for these issues within the next 12 months. we also continue to be subject to examination by the irs for tax years 2010 to 2016.
we are subject to income tax in many jurisdictions outside the u.s. our operations in certain jurisdictions remain subject to examination for tax
years 1996 to 2016, some of which are currently under audit by local tax authorities. the resolutions of these audits are not expected to be material to our consolidated financial statements.
table of contents
part ii  item 8
note 14 restructuring charges
phone hardware integration  in july 2014,
we announced a restructuring plan to simplify our organization and align nds with our companys overall strategy (the phone hardware integration plan). pursuant to the phone hardware integration plan, we eliminated approximately
19,000 positions in fiscal year 2015, including approximately 13,000 professional and factory positions related to the nds business. the actions associated with the phone hardware integration plan were completed as of june30, 2015.
in connection with the phone hardware integration plan, we incurred total restructuring charges of $1.3 billion, including severance expenses and
other reorganization costs, primarily associated with our facilities consolidation and write-downs of certain assets. all restructuring charges incurred under the phone hardware integration plan were recognized in fiscal year 2015.
phone hardware restructuring  in june 2015,
management approved a plan to restructure our phone business to better focus and align resources (the phone hardware restructuring plan), under which we eliminated approximately 7,400 positions in fiscal year 2016.
in fiscal year 2015, we incurred restructuring charges of $780 million under the phone hardware restructuring plan, including severance expenses
and other reorganization costs. in fiscal year 2016, we reversed $21 million of previously estimated restructuring charges related to contract termination costs. the actions associated with the phone hardware restructuring plan were substantially
complete as of june30, 2016, and are expected to be completed by the end of calendar year 2016.  2016 restructuring
we periodically evaluate how to best deploy the companys resources. in the fourth quarter of 2016, management approved restructuring plans
that would result in job eliminations, primarily across our smartphone hardware business and global sales. in addition to the elimination of 1,850 positions that were announced in may 2016, approximately 2,850 roles globally will be reduced during
the year as an extension of the earlier plan, and these actions are expected to be completed by the end of fiscal year 2017.  in
connection with the restructuring plans, we incurred restructuring charges of $501 million in fiscal year 2016, including severance expenses and other reorganization costs. we do not expect to incur additional charges for these restructuring plans
in subsequent years.  restructuring charges associated with each of these plans were included in impairment, integration, and
restructuring expenses on our consolidated income statement, and reflected in corporate and other in our table of operating income (loss) by segment in note 21 segment information and geographic data.
changes in the restructuring liability were as follows:
(in millions)
severance
other
(a)
total
restructuring liability as of june30, 2015
$
$
$
restructuring charges
reversal of prior year restructuring charges
(21
)
(21
)
cash paid
(466
)
(112
)
(578
)
other
(24
)
(6
)
(30
)
restructuring liability as of june30, 2016
$
$
$
(a)
other primarily reflects activities associated with the consolidation of our facilities and manufacturing operations, including contract
termination costs and asset write-downs.
table of contents
part ii  item 8
note 15  unearned revenue
unearned revenue by segment was as follows:
(in millions)
june30,
productivity and business processes
$
12,482
$
11,643
intelligent cloud
11,472
10,346
more personal computing
3,246
3,246
corporate and other
6,709
total
$
33,909
$
25,318
revenue from windows 10 is primarily recognized at the time of billing in the more personal computing segment, and
the deferral and subsequent recognition of revenue is reflected in corporate and other in the table above. as of june30, 2016, we deferred a net $6.6 billion in revenue related to windows 10.
note 16  commitments  construction
and operating lease commitments  we have committed $2.0 billion for constructing new buildings, building improvements, and leasehold
improvements as of june30, 2016.  we have operating leases for most u.s. and international sales and support offices, research and
development facilities, manufacturing facilities, retail stores, and certain equipment. rental expense for facilities operating leases was $1.0 billion, $989 million, and $874 million, in fiscal years 2016, 2015, and 2014, respectively. future
minimum rental commitments under non-cancellable facilities operating leases in place as of june30, 2016 are as follows:
(in millions)
year ending june30,
$
thereafter
2,118
total
$
6,464
other commitments  on june11, 2016, we entered into a definitive agreement to acquire linkedin corporation (linkedin) for $196 per share in an all-cash transaction valued at $26.2 billion, inclusive of
linkedins net cash (the merger agreement). we will finance the transaction primarily through the issuance of new indebtedness. the merger agreement has been unanimously approved by the boards of directors of both microsoft and
linkedin, and we expect the acquisition will close in the 2016 calendar year, subject to approval by linkedins shareholders, satisfaction of certain regulatory approvals, and other customary closing conditions. the transaction is expected to
accelerate the growth of linkedin, as well as office 365 and dynamics.
table of contents
part ii  item 8
note 17  contingencies
patent and intellectual property claims
ipcom patent litigation  ipcom
gmbh& co. (ipcom) is a german company that holds a large portfolio of mobile technology-related patents spanning about 170 patent families and addressing a broad range of cellular technologies. ipcom has asserted 19 of these
patents in litigation against nokia and many of the leading cell phone companies and operators. in november 2014, microsoft and ipcom entered into a standstill agreement staying all of the pending litigation against microsoft to permit the parties
to pursue settlement discussions.  interdigital patent litigation  interdigital technology corporation and interdigital communications corporation (collectively, idt) filed four patent infringement cases against nokia in the international trade commission
(itc) and in u.s. district court for the district of delaware between 2007 and 2013. we have been added to these cases as a defendant. idt has cases pending against other defendants based on the same patents because most of the patents
at issue allegedly relate to 3g and 4g wireless communications standards essential functionality. the cases involving us include three itc investigations where idt sought an order excluding importation of 3g and 4g phones into the u.s. and one
active case in u.s. district court in delaware seeking an injunction and damages. each of the itc matters has been resolved in our favor. in september 2015, in an inter partes review the united states patent trial and appeal board issued a
final written decision that deemed unpatentable all asserted claims of the patent remaining at issue in the delaware case. idt has appealed this decision to the u.s. court of appeals for the federal circuit. the delaware case has been stayed pending
final completion of the inter partes review (including appeals and any subsequent proceedings in the patent office). we filed an antitrust complaint against idt in the district of delaware in august 2015 asserting violations of section2
of the sherman act, alleging the unlawful exploitation of standard essential patents. idt filed a motion to dismiss, which the district court denied.
european copyright levies  we assumed from
nokia all potential liability due to nokias alleged failure to pay private copying levies in various european countries based upon sale of memory cards and mobile phones that incorporate blank memory.the levies are based upon
a 2001 european union (eu) directive establishing a right for end users to make copies of copyrighted works for personal or private use, but also allowing the collection of levies based upon sales of blank media or recording devices to
compensate copyright holders for private copying.various collecting societies in eu countries initiated litigation against nokia, stating that nokia must pay levies not only based upon sales of blank memory cards, but also phones that include
blank memory for data storage on the phones, regardless of actual usage of that memory.the most significant cases against nokia are pending in germany and austria, due to both the high volume of sales and high levy amounts sought in these
countries. in december 2015, the industry group bitkom, of which we are a member, reached a settlement with the german collecting society for all claims from 2008 forward, leaving litigation only for the period 2004-2007 pending in germany. in
addition, the industry is engaged in settlement negotiations with the austrian collecting society. we have also settled copyright levies litigation in spain and france.  other patent and intellectual property claims  in addition to these cases, there were 54 other
patent infringement cases pending against microsoft as of june30, 2016.  antitrust, unfair competition, and overcharge class actions
antitrust and unfair competition class action lawsuits were filed against us in british columbia, ontario, and quebec, canada. all
three have been certified on behalf of canadian indirect purchasers who acquired licenses for microsoft operating system software and/or productivity application software between 1998 and 2010.
table of contents
part ii  item 8
the trial of the british columbia action commenced in may 2016. the plaintiffs are expected to
file their case in chief in august 2016, setting out claims made, authorities, and evidence in support.a six-month oral hearing is scheduled to commence in september 2017, consisting of cross examination on witness affidavits. the ontario and
quebec cases are inactive.  other antitrust litigation and claims  china state administration for industry and commerce investigation   in 2014, microsoft
was informed that chinas state administration for industry and commerce (saic) had begun a formal investigation relating to chinas anti-monopoly law, and the saic conducted onsite inspections of microsoft offices in beijing,
shanghai, guangzhou, and chengdu.saic has stated the investigation relates to compatibility, bundle sales, file verification issues related to windows and office software, and potentially other issues.
product-related litigation  u.s. cell phone litigation
nokia, along with other handset manufacturers and network operators, is a defendant in 19 lawsuits filed in the superior court for
the district of columbia by individual plaintiffs who allege that radio emissions from cellular handsets caused their brain tumors and other adverse health effects. we assumed responsibility for these claims as part of the nds acquisition and have
been substituted for the nokia defendants. nine of these cases were filed in 2002 and are consolidated for certain pre-trial proceedings; the remaining 10 cases are stayed. in a separate 2009 decision, the court of appeals for the district of
columbia held that adverse health effect claims arising from the use of cellular handsets that operate within the u.s. federal communications commission radio frequency emission guidelines (fcc guidelines) are pre-empted by federal law.
the plaintiffs allege that their handsets either operated outside the fcc guidelines or were manufactured before the fcc guidelines went into effect. the lawsuits also allege an industry-wide conspiracy to manipulate the science and testing around
emission guidelines.  in 2013, defendants in the consolidated cases moved to exclude plaintiffs expert evidence of general
causation on the basis of flawed scientific methodologies. in 2014, the court granted in part defendants motion to exclude plaintiffs general causation experts. the plaintiffs filed an interlocutory appeal challenging the standard for
evaluating expert scientific evidence, which the district of columbia court of appeals agreed to hear en banc. trial court proceedings are stayed pending resolution of the appeal.  canadian cell phone class action  nokia, along with other handset manufacturers and network
operators, is a defendant in a 2013 class action lawsuit filed in the supreme court of british columbia by a purported class of canadians who have used cellular phones for at least 1,600 hours, including a subclass of users with brain tumors.
microsoft was served with the complaint in june 2014 and has been substituted for the nokia defendants. the litigation is not yet active as several defendants remain to be served.  other  we also are subject to a variety of other claims and suits that arise from time to time
in the ordinary course of our business. although management currently believes that resolving claims against us, individually or in aggregate, will not have a material adverse impact on our consolidated financial statements, these matters are
subject to inherent uncertainties and managements view of these matters may change in the future.  as of june30, 2016, we
accrued aggregate legal liabilities of $521 million in other current liabilities. while we intend to defend these matters vigorously, adverse outcomes that we estimate could reach approximately $1.6 billion in aggregate beyond recorded amounts are
reasonably possible. were unfavorable final outcomes to occur, there exists the possibility of a material adverse impact on our consolidated financial statements for the period in which the effects become reasonably estimable.
table of contents
part ii  item 8
indemnifications  we provide indemnifications of varying scope and size to certain customers against claims of intellectual property infringement made by third parties arising from the use of our products and certain other matters.
additionally, we have agreed to cover damages resulting from breaches of certain security and privacy commitments in our cloud business. we evaluate estimated losses for these indemnifications, and we consider such factors as the degree of
probability of an unfavorable outcome and the ability to make a reasonable estimate of the amount of loss. to date, we have not encountered significant costs as a result of these obligations and have not accrued any liabilities related to these
indemnifications on our consolidated financial statements.
note 18  stockholders equity
shares outstanding
shares of common stock outstanding were as follows:
(in millions)
year ended june30,
balance, beginning of year
8,027
8,239
8,328
issued
repurchased
(294
)
(295
)
(175
)
balance, end of year
7,808
8,027
8,239
share repurchases  on september16, 2013, our board of directors approved a share repurchase program authorizing up to $40.0 billion in share repurchases. the share repurchase program became effective on october1, 2013,
has no expiration date, and may be suspended or discontinued at any time without notice. this share repurchase program replaced the share repurchase program that was announced on september22, 2008 and expired on september30, 2013. as of
june30, 2016, $7.1 billion remained of our $40.0 billion share repurchase program. all repurchases were made using cash resources.
we repurchased the following shares of common stock under the above-described repurchase plans:
(in millions)
shares
amount
shares
amount
shares
amount
year ended june30,
(a)
first quarter
$
4,000
$
2,000
$
1,500
second quarter
3,600
2,000
2,000
third quarter
3,600
5,000
1,791
fourth quarter
3,600
4,209
1,118
total
$
14,800
$
13,209
$
6,409
(a)
of the 175million shares repurchased in fiscal year 2014, 128million shares were repurchased for $4.9 billion under the share repurchase
program approved by our board of directors on september16, 2013 and 47million shares were repurchased for $1.5 billion under the share repurchase program that was announced on september22, 2008 and expired on september30,
2013.  the above table excludes shares repurchased to settle statutory employee tax withholding related to the
vesting of stock awards.
table of contents
part ii  item 8
dividends  in fiscal year 2016, our board of directors declared the following dividends:
declaration date
dividend pershare
record date
totalamount
paymentdate
(in millions)
september15, 2015
$
0.36
november19,2015
$
2,868
december10,2015
december2, 2015
$
0.36
february18, 2016
$
2,842
march10, 2016
march15, 2016
$
0.36
may19, 2016
$
2,821
june9, 2016
june14, 2016
$
0.36
august18, 2016
$
2,811
september8, 2016
the dividend declared on june14, 2016 will be paid after the filing date of the 2016 form 10-k and was
included in other current liabilities as of june30, 2016.  in fiscal year 2015, our board of directors declared the following
dividends:
declaration date
dividend pershare
record date
totalamount
paymentdate
(in millions)
september 16, 2014
$
0.31
november20,2014
$
2,547
december11,2014
december 3, 2014
$
0.31
february 19, 2015
$
2,532
march 12, 2015
march 10, 2015
$
0.31
may 21, 2015
$
2,496
june 11, 2015
june9, 2015
$
0.31
august 20, 2015
$
2,475
september10,2015
the dividend declared on june9, 2015 was included in other current liabilities as of june30, 2015.
note 19  accumulated other comprehensive income
the following table summarizes the changes in accumulated other comprehensive income by component:
(in millions)
year ended june30,
derivatives
accumulated other comprehensive income balance, beginning of period
$
$
$
unrealized gains, net of tax effects of $24, $35 and $2
1,152
reclassification adjustments for gains included in revenue
(625
)
(608
)
(104
)
tax expense included in provision for income taxes
amounts reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive income
(589
)
(593
)
(98
)
net current period other comprehensive income (loss)
(238
)
(35
)
accumulated other comprehensive income balance, end of period
$
$
$
investments
accumulated other comprehensive income balance, beginning of period
$
3,169
$
3,531
$
1,794
unrealized gains, net of tax effects of $120, $59 and $1,067
2,053
reclassification adjustments for gains included in other income (expense), net
(688
)
(728
)
(447
)
tax expense included in provision for income taxes
amounts reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive income
(447
)
(472
)
(316
)
net current period other comprehensive income (loss)
(228
)
(362
)
1,737
accumulated other comprehensive income balance, end of period
$
2,941
$
3,169
$
3,531
translation adjustments and other
accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) balance, beginning of period
$
(1,237
)
$
$
(117
)
translation adjustments and other, net of tax effects of $(33), $16 and $12
(519
)
(1,383
)
accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) balance, end of period
$
(1,756
)
$
(1,237
)
$
accumulated other comprehensive income, end of period
$
1,537
$
2,522
$
3,708
table of contents
part ii  item 8
note 20  employee stock and savings plans
we grant stock-based compensation to employees and directors. as of june30, 2016 an aggregate of 214million shares
were authorized for future grant under our stock plans. awards that expire or are canceled without delivery of shares generally become available for issuance under the plans. we issue new shares of microsoft common stock to satisfy exercises and
vesting of awards granted under all of our stock plans. we also have an espp for all eligible employees.  stock-based compensation
expense and related income tax benefits were as follows:
(in millions)
year ended june30,
stock-based compensation expense
$
2,668
$
2,574
$
2,446
income tax benefits related to stock-based compensation
stock plans
stock awards entitle the holder to receive shares of microsoft common stock as the award vests. stock awards generally vest over a four or
five-year service period.  executive incentive plan  under the executive incentive plan, the compensation committee approves stock awards to executive officers and certain senior executives. the stock awards vest ratably in august of each of the four years following
the grant date.  activity for all stock plans  the fair value of stock awards were estimated on the date of grant using the following assumptions:
year ended june30,
dividends per share (quarterly amounts)
$
0.31-$0.36
$
0.28-$0.31
$
0.23-$0.28
interest rates
1.1%-1.8%
1.2%-1.9%
1.3%-1.8%
during fiscal year 2016, the following activity occurred under our stock plans:
shares
weighted average grant-date
fair value
(inmillions)
stock awards
nonvested balance, beginning of year
$
32.72
granted
$
41.51
vested
(85
)
$
30.98
forfeited
(20
)
$
35.93
nonvested balance, end of year
$
36.92
as of june30, 2016, there was approximately $4.8 billion of total unrecognized compensation costs related to
stock awards. these costs are expected to be recognized over a weighted average period of 3 years. the weighted average grant-date fair value of stock award granted was $41.51, $42.36, and $31.50 for fiscal years 2016, 2015, and 2014, respectively.
the fair value of stock awards vested was $3.9 billion, $4.2 billion, and $3.2 billion, for fiscal years 2016, 2015, and 2014, respectively.
table of contents
part ii  item 8
employee stock purchase plan  we have an espp for all eligible employees. shares of our common stock may be purchased by employees at three-month intervals at 90% of the fair market value on the last trading day of each three-month period.
employees may purchase shares having a value not exceeding 15% of their gross compensation during an offering period. employees purchased the following shares during the periods presented:
(shares in millions)
year ended june30,
shares purchased
average price per share
$
44.83
$
39.87
$
33.60
as of june30, 2016, 142million shares of our common stock were reserved for future issuance through the
espp.  savings plan  we have a
savings plan in the u.s. that qualifies under section401(k) of the internal revenue code, and a number of savings plans in international locations. participating u.s. employees may contribute a portion of their salary, subject to certain
limitations. beginning january 2016, we contribute fifty cents for each dollar a participant contributes in this plan, with a maximum employer contribution of 50% of the irs contribution limit for the calendar year. prior to january 2016, we
contributed fifty cents for each dollar of the first 6% a participant contributed in this plan, with a maximum contribution of the lesser of 3% of a participants earnings or 3% of the irs compensation limit for the calendar year. matching
contributions for all plans were $549 million, $454 million, and $420 million in fiscal years 2016, 2015, and 2014, respectively, and were expensed as contributed.  note 21  segment information and geographic data  in its operation of the business,
management, including our chief operating decision maker, reviews certain financial information, including segmented internal profit and loss statements prepared on a basis not consistent with u.s. gaap.
in june 2015, we announced a change in organizational structure to align to our strategic direction as a productivity and platform company. during
the first quarter of fiscal year 2016, our chief operating decision maker requested changes in the information that he regularly reviews for purposes of allocating resources and assessing performance. as a result, beginning in fiscal year 2016, we
report our financial performance based on our new segments, productivity and business processes, intelligent cloud, and more personal computing, and analyze operating income as the measure of segment profitability. we have recast certain prior
period amounts to conform to the way we internally manage and monitor segment performance.  our reportable segments are described below.
productivity and business processes  our productivity and business processes segment consists of products and services in our portfolio of productivity, communication, and information services, spanning a variety of devices and platforms. this segment
primarily comprises:
office commercial, including volume licensing and subscriptions to office 365 commercial for products and services such as office, exchange, sharepoint, and
skype for business, and related client access licenses (cals).
office consumer, including office sold through retail or through an office 365 consumer subscription, and office consumer services, including skype,
outlook.com, and onedrive.
dynamics business solutions, including dynamics erp products, dynamics crm on-premises, and dynamics crm online.
table of contents
part ii  item 8
intelligent cloud  our intelligent cloud segment consists of our public, private, and hybrid server products and cloud services that can power modern business. this segment primarily comprises:
server products and cloud services, including microsoft sql server, windows server, visual studio, system center, and related cals, as well as azure.
enterprise services, including premier support services and microsoft consulting services.
more personal computing  our more personal
computing segment consists of products and services geared towards harmonizing the interests of end users, developers, and it professionals across screens of all sizes. this segment primarily comprises:
windows, including windows original equipment manufacturer licensing (windows oem) and other non-volume licensing of the windows operating system,
volume licensing of the windows operating system, patent licensing, windows embedded, msn display advertising, and windows phone licensing.
devices, including surface, phones, and pc accessories.
gaming, including xbox hardware; xbox live, comprising transactions, subscriptions, and advertising; video games; and third-party video game royalties.
search advertising.
revenue and costs are generally directly attributed to our segments. however, due to the integrated structure of our business, certain revenue
recognized and costs incurred by one segment may benefit other segments. revenue on certain contracts is allocated among the segments based on the relative value of the underlying products and services, which can include allocation based on actual
prices charged, prices when sold separately, or estimated costs plus a profit margin. cost of revenue is allocated in certain cases based on a relative revenue methodology. operating expenses that are allocated primarily include those relating to
marketing of products and services from which multiple segments benefit, and are generally allocated based on relative gross margin.  in
addition, certain costs incurred at a corporate level that are identifiable and that benefit our segments are allocated to them. these allocated costs include costs of: legal, including settlements, and fines; information technology; human
resources; finance; excise taxes; field selling; shared facilities services; and customer service and support. each allocation is measured differently based on the specific facts and circumstances of the costs being allocated. certain
corporate-level activity is not allocated to our segments, including impairment, integration, and restructuring expenses.  segment
revenue and operating income (loss) were as follows during the periods presented:
(in millions)
year ended june30,
revenue
productivity and business processes
$
26,487
$
26,430
$
26,976
intelligent cloud
25,042
23,715
21,735
more personal computing
40,460
43,160
38,460
corporate and other
(6,669
)
(338
)
total revenue
$
85,320
$
93,580
$
86,833
table of contents
part ii  item 8
(in millions)
year ended june30,
operating income (loss)
productivity and business processes
$
12,461
$
13,359
$
14,173
intelligent cloud
9,358
9,871
8,446
more personal computing
6,142
4,667
5,605
corporate and other
(7,779
)
(9,736
)
(465
)
total operating income
$
20,182
$
18,161
$
27,759
corporate and other operating income (loss) includes adjustments to conform our internal accounting policies to
u.s. gaap, and impairment, integration, and restructuring expenses. significant internal accounting policies that differ from u.s. gaap relate to revenue recognition.  corporate and other operating income (loss) activity was as follows during the periods presented:
(in millions)
year ended june30,
impairment, integration and restructuring expenses
$
(1,110
)
$
(10,011
)
$
(127
)
revenue reconciling amounts and other(a)
(6,669
)
(338
)
total corporate and other
$
(7,779
)
$
(9,736
)
$
(465
)
(a)
revenue reconciling amounts and other for fiscal year 2016 primarily consisted of a net $6.6 billion of revenue deferrals related to sales of windows 10.
revenue reconciling amounts for fiscal year 2015 included a net $303 million of previously deferred net revenue related to sales of bundled products and services (bundled offerings). revenue reconciling amounts for fiscal year 2014
included a net $349 million of revenue deferrals related to bundled offerings.  no sales to an individual customer
or country other than the united states accounted for more than 10% of fiscal year 2016, 2015, or 2014 revenue. revenue, classified by the major geographic areas in which our customers are located, was as follows:
(in millions)
year ended june30,
united
states(a)
$
40,578
$
42,941
$
43,474
other countries
44,742
50,639
43,359
total
$
85,320
$
93,580
$
86,833
(a)
includes billings to oems and certain multinational organizations because of the nature of these businesses and the impracticability of determining the
geographic source of the revenue.  revenue from external customers, classified by significant product and service
offerings were as follows:
(in millions)
year ended june30,
microsoft office system
$
23,588
$
23,538
$
24,323
server products and tools
19,177
18,612
17,055
xbox
9,395
9,121
8,643
windows pc operating system
8,104
(a)
14,826
16,856
advertising
6,098
4,557
4,016
consulting and product support services
5,641
5,090
4,767
surface
4,108
3,900
1,883
phone
3,358
7,702
3,073
other
5,851
6,234
6,217
total
$
85,320
$
93,580
$
86,833
(a)
includes a net $6.6 billion of revenue deferrals related to sales of windows 10.
table of contents
part ii  item 8
our total commercial cloud revenue, which primarily comprises office 365 commercial, azure,
dynamics online, and other cloud properties, was $9.5 billion, $5.8 billion, and $2.8 billion in fiscal years 2016, 2015, and 2014, respectively. these amounts are included in their respective product categories in the table above.
assets are not allocated to segments for internal reporting presentations. a portion of amortization and depreciation is included with various
other costs in an overhead allocation to each segment; it is impracticable for us to separately identify the amount of amortization and depreciation by segment that is included in the measure of segment profit or loss.
long-lived assets, excluding financial instruments and tax assets, classified by the location of the controlling statutory company and with
countries over 10% of the total shown separately, were as follows:
(in millions)
june30,
united states
$
22,819
$
19,562
$
17,653
luxembourg
6,854
6,879
6,913
finland
1,757
9,840
other countries
9,899
8,307
5,713
total
$
39,961
$
36,505
$
40,119
note 22  quarterly information (unaudited)
(in millions, except per share amounts)
quarter ended
september30
december31
march31
june30
total
fiscal year 2016
revenue
(a)
$
20,379
$
23,796
$
20,531
$
20,614
$
85,320
gross margin
13,172
13,924
12,809
12,635
52,540
operating income
5,793
6,026
5,283
3,080
20,182
net income
4,902
5,018
3,756
3,122
(b)
16,798
(b)
basic earnings per share
0.61
0.63
0.48
0.40
2.12
diluted earnings per share
0.61
0.62
0.47
0.39
(b)
2.10
(b)
fiscal year 2015
revenue
$
23,201
$
26,470
$
21,729
$
22,180
$
93,580
gross margin
14,928
16,334
14,568
14,712
60,542
operating income (loss)
5,844
7,776
6,594
(2,053
)
18,161
net income (loss)
4,540
5,863
4,985
(3,195
)
(c)
12,193
(d)
basic earnings (loss) per share
0.55
0.71
0.61
(0.40
)
1.49
diluted earnings (loss) per share
0.54
0.71
0.61
(0.40
)
(c)
1.48
(d)
(a)
reflects the impact of the net revenue deferral from windows 10 of $1.3 billion, $1.7 billion, $1.6 billion, and $2.0 billion, for the first, second,
third, and fourth quarter of fiscal year 2016, respectively, and $6.6 billion for fiscal year 2016.
(b)
includes $630 million of asset impairment charges related to our phone business, and $480 million of restructuring charges associated with our 2016
restructuring plans, which together decreased net income and diluted eps by $895 million and $0.11, respectively.
(c)
includes $7.5 billion of goodwill and asset impairment charges related to our phone business, and $940 million of integration and restructuring expenses,
primarily associated with our phone hardware restructuring plan, which together decreased net income and diluted eps by $8.3 billion and $1.02, respectively.
(d)
includes $7.5 billion of goodwill and asset impairment charges related to our phone business, and $2.5 billion of integration and restructuring expenses,
primarily associated with our phone hardware integration plan and phone hardware restructuring plan, which together decreased net income and diluted eps by $9.5 billion and $1.15, respectively.
table of contents
part ii  item 8
report of independent registered public accounting firm
to the board of directors and stockholders of microsoft corporation  redmond, washington  we have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheets of microsoft
corporation and subsidiaries (the company) as of june30, 2016 and 2015, and the related consolidated statements of income, comprehensive income, cash flows, and stockholders equity for each of the three years in the period
ended june30, 2016.these financial statements are the responsibility of the companys management. our responsibility is to express an opinion on these financial statements based on our audits.
we conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the public company accounting oversight board (united states).those standards
require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material misstatement.an audit includes examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in
the financial statements.an audit also includes assessing the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall financial statement presentation. we believe that our audits provide a
reasonable basis for our opinion.  in our opinion, such consolidated financial statements present fairly, in all material respects, the
financial position of microsoft corporation and subsidiaries as of june30, 2016 and 2015, and the results of their operations and their cash flows for each of the three years in the period ended june30, 2016, in conformity with
accounting principles generally accepted in the united states of america.  we have also audited, in accordance with the standards of the
public company accounting oversight board (united states), the companys internal control over financial reporting as of june30, 2016, based on the criteria established in internal control  integrated framework (2013) issued
by the committee of sponsoring organizations of the treadway commission and our report dated july28, 2016 expressed an unqualified opinion on the companys internal control over financial reporting.
/s/deloitte& touche llp
seattle, washington  july28,
table of contents
part ii  item 9, 9a
item9. changes in and disagreements with accountants on
accounting and financial disclosure  not applicable.  item9a. controls and procedures  under the supervision and
with the participation of our management, including the chief executive officer and chief financial officer, we have evaluated the effectiveness of our disclosure controls and procedures as required by exchange act rule 13a-15(b) as of the end of
the period covered by this report. based on that evaluation, the chief executive officer and chief financial officer have concluded that these disclosure controls and procedures are effective.
report of management on internal control over financial reporting
our management is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over financial reporting for the company. internal control
over financial reporting is a process to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of our financial reporting for external purposes in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the united states of america. internal
control over financial reporting includes maintaining records that in reasonable detail accurately and fairly reflect our transactions; providing reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary for preparation of our financial
statements; providing reasonable assurance that receipts and expenditures of company assets are made in accordance with management authorization; and providing reasonable assurance that unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of company assets
that could have a material effect on our financial statements would be prevented or detected on a timely basis. because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting is not intended to provide absolute assurance that a
misstatement of our financial statements would be prevented or detected.  management conducted an evaluation of the effectiveness of our
internal control over financial reporting based on the framework in internal control  integrated framework (2013) issued by the committee of sponsoring organizations of the treadway commission. based on this evaluation, management
concluded that the companys internal control over financial reporting was effective as of june30, 2016. there were no changes in our internal control over financial reporting during the quarter ended june30, 2016 that have
materially affected, or are reasonably likely to materially affect, our internal control over financial reporting. deloitte& touche llp has audited our internal control over financial reporting as of june30, 2016; their report is
included in item9a.
table of contents
part ii  item 9a
report of independent registered public accounting firm
to the board of directors and stockholders of microsoft corporation  redmond, washington  we have audited the internal control over financial reporting of microsoft
corporation and subsidiaries (the company) as of june30, 2016, based on criteria established in internal control  integrated framework (2013) issued by the committee of sponsoring organizations of the treadway
commission.the companys management is responsible for maintaining effective internal control over financial reporting and for its assessment of the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting, included in the accompanying
report of management on internal control over financial reporting.our responsibility is to express an opinion on the companys internal control over financial reporting based on our audit.
we conducted our audit in accordance with the standards of the public company accounting oversight board (united states).those standards
require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether effective internal control over financial reporting was maintained in all material respects.our audit included obtaining an understanding of internal
control over financial reporting, assessing the risk that a material weakness exists, testing and evaluating the design and operating effectiveness of internal control based on the assessed risk, and performing such other procedures as we considered
necessary in the circumstances.we believe that our audit provides a reasonable basis for our opinion.  a companys internal
control over financial reporting is a process designed by, or under the supervision of, the companys principal executive and principal financial officers, or persons performing similar functions, and effected by the companys board of
directors, management, and other personnel to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting
principles.a companys internal control over financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that (1) pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and
dispositions of the assets of the company; (2) provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and that receipts and
expenditures of the company are being made only in accordance with authorizations of management and directors of the company; and (3) provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use, or
disposition of the companys assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements.  because of the inherent
limitations of internal control over financial reporting, including the possibility of collusion or improper management override of controls, material misstatements due to error or fraud may not be prevented or detected on a timely basis.also,
projections of any evaluation of the effectiveness of the internal control over financial reporting to future periods are subject to the risk that the controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of compliance
with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.  in our opinion, the company maintained, in all material respects, effective internal
control over financial reporting as of june30, 2016, based on the criteria established in internal control  integrated framework (2013) issued by the committee of sponsoring organizations of the treadway commission.
we have also audited, in accordance with the standards of the public company accounting oversight board (united states), the consolidated financial
statements as of and for the year ended june30, 2016 of the company and our report dated july28, 2016 expressed an unqualified opinion on those financial statements.  /s/deloitte& touche llp
seattle, washington  july28,
table of contents
part ii, iii  item 9b, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14
item 9b. other information
not applicable.  part iii
item10. directors, executive officers and corporate governance
a list of our executive officers and biographical information appears in part i, item1 of this form 10-k. information about our directors may
be found under the caption our director nominees in our proxy statement for the annual meeting of shareholders to be held november30, 2016 (the proxy statement). information about our audit committee may be found under
the caption board committees in the proxy statement. that information is incorporated herein by reference.  the information
in the proxy statement set forth under the caption section 16(a) beneficial ownership reporting compliance is incorporated herein by reference.  we have adopted the microsoft finance code of professional conduct (the finance code of ethics), a code of ethics that applies to our chief executive officer, chief financial officer, chief accounting
officer and corporate controller, and other finance organization employees. the finance code of ethics is publicly available on our website at www.microsoft.com/investor/msfinancecode. if we make any substantive amendments to the finance code of
ethics or grant any waiver, including any implicit waiver, from a provision of the code to our chief executive officer, chief financial officer, or chief accounting officer and corporate controller, we will disclose the nature of the amendment or
waiver on that website or in a report on form8-k.  item11. executive compensation
the information in the proxy statement set forth under the captions director compensation, named executive
officer compensation, compensation committee interlocks and insider participation, and compensation committee report is incorporated herein by reference.
item12. security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management and related stockholder matters
the information in the proxy statement set forth under the captions stock ownership information and equity
compensation plan information is incorporated herein by reference.  item 13. certain relationships and
related transactions, and directorindependence  the information set forth in the proxy statement under the captions
director independence and certain relationships and related transactions is incorporated herein by reference.
item14. principal accounting fees and services
information concerning principal accountant fees and services appears in the proxy statement under the headings fees billed by
deloitte& touche and policy on audit committee pre-approval of audit and permissible non-audit services of independent auditor and is incorporated herein by reference.
table of contents
part iv  item 15
part iv  item 15. exhibits, financial statement schedules
(a)
financial statements and schedules  the financial statements are set forth under item8 of this form 10-k, as indexed below. financial statement schedules have been omitted since they either are not required, not applicable, or the information
is otherwise included.
index to financial statements
page
income statements
comprehensive income statements
balance sheets
cash flows statements
stockholders equity statements
notes to financial statements
report of independent registered public accounting firm
(b)
exhibit listing
incorporated by reference
exhibitnumber
ehibit description
filed
herewith
form
period
ending
exhibit
filingdate
2.1
agreement and plan of merger, dated as of june11, 2016, by and among microsoft corporation, liberty merger sub inc., and linkedin corporation
8-k
***
2.1
6/13/16
3.1
amended and restated articles of incorporation of microsoft corporation
8-k
3.1
3/17/16
3.2
bylaws of microsoft corporation
8-k
3.2
7/5/16
4.1
form of indenture between microsoft corporation and the bank of new york mellon trust company, n.a., as trustee (base indenture)
3-asr
4.1
11/20/08
4.2
form of first supplemental indenture for 2.95% notes due 2014, 4.20% notes due 2019, and 5.20% notes due 2039, dated as of may 18, 2009, between microsoft corporation and the bank of new york
mellon trust company, n.a., as trustee, to the base indenture
8-k
4.2
5/15/09
4.5
form of second supplemental indenture for 0.875% notes due 2013, 1.625% notes due 2015, 3.00% notes due 2020, and 4.50% notes due 2040, dated as of september27, 2010, between microsoft
corporation and the bank of new york mellon trust company, n.a., as trustee, to the indenture, dated as of may18, 2009, between microsoft corporation and the bank of new york mellon trust company, n.a., as trustee
8-k
4.5
9/27/10
table of contents
part iv  item 15
incorporated by reference
exhibitnumber
exhibit description
filed
herewith
form
period
ending
exhibit
filingdate
4.6
third supplemental indenture for 2.500% notes due 2016, 4.000% notes due 2021, and 5.300% notes due 2041, dated as of february8, 2011, between microsoft corporation and the bank of new
york mellon trust company, n.a., as trustee, to the indenture, dated as of may18, 2009, between microsoft corporation and the bank of new york mellon trust company, n.a., as trustee
8-k
4.6
2/8/11
4.7
fourth supplemental indenture for 0.875% notes due 2017, 2.125% notes due 2022, and 3.500% notes due 2042, dated as of november 7, 2012, between microsoft corporation and the bank of new york
mellon trust company, n.a., as trustee, to the indenture, dated as of may 18, 2009, between microsoft corporation and the bank of new york mellon trust company, n.a., as trustee
8-k
4.7
11/7/12
4.8
fifth supplemental indenture for 2.625% notes due 2033, dated as of may 2, 2013 between microsoft corporation and the bank of new york mellon trust company, n.a., as trustee, to the
indenture, dated as of may 18, 2009, between microsoft corporation and the bank of new york mellon trust company, n.a., as trustee
8-k
4.1
5/1/13
4.9
sixth supplemental indenture for 1.000% notes due 2018, 2.375% notes due 2023, and 3.750% notes due 2043, dated as of may 2, 2013, between microsoft corporation and the bank of new york
mellon trust company, n.a., as trustee, to the indenture, dated as of may 18, 2009, between microsoft corporation and the bank of new york mellon trust company, n.a., as trustee
8-k
4.2
5/1/13
4.10
seventh supplemental indenture for 2.125% notes due 2021 and 3.125% notes due 2028, dated as of december 6, 2013, between microsoft corporation and the bank of new york mellon trust company,
n.a., as trustee, to the indenture, dated as of may 18, 2009, between microsoft corporation and the bank of new york mellon trust company, n.a., as trustee
8-k
4.1
12/6/13
4.11
eighth supplemental indenture for 1.625% notes due 2018, 3.625% notes due 2023, and 4.875% notes due 2043, dated as of december6, 2013, between microsoft corporation and the bank of new
york mellon trust company, n.a., as trustee, to the indenture, dated as of may18, 2009, between microsoft corporation and the bank of new york mellon trust company, n.a., as trustee
8-k
4.2
12/6/13
table of contents
part iv  item 15
incorporated by reference
exhibitnumber
exhibit description
filed
herewith
form
period
ending
exhibit
filingdate
4.12
ninth supplemental indenture for 1.850% notes due 2020, 2.375% notes due 2022, 2.700% notes due 2025, 3.500% notes due 2035, 3.750% notes due 2045, and 4.000% notes due 2055, dated as of
february 12, 2015, between microsoft corporation and u.s. bank national association, as trustee, to the indenture, dated as of may 18, 2009, between microsoft corporation and the bank of new york mellon trust company, n.a., as trustee
8-k
4.1
2/12/15
4.13
tenth supplemental indenture for 1.300% notes due 2018, 2.000% notes due 2020, 2.650% notes due 2022, 3.125% notes due 2025, 4.200% notes due 2035, 4.450% notes due 2045, and 4.750% notes due
2055, dated as of november 3, 2015, between microsoft corporation and u.s. bank national association, as trustee, to the indenture, dated as of may 18, 2009, between microsoft corporation and the bank of new york mellon trust company, n.a., as
trustee
8-k
4.1
11/3/15
10.1*
microsoft corporation 2001 stock plan
x
10.3*
microsoft corporation 1999 stock plan for non-employee directors
8-k
10.3
11/15/04
10.4*
microsoft corporation employee stock purchase plan
10-k
6/30/12
10.4
7/26/12
10.5*
microsoft corporation deferred compensation plan
10-q
3/31/12
10.5
4/19/12
10.7*
form of stock award agreement for non-employee directors under the microsoft corporation 1999 stock plan for non-employee directors
10-k
6/30/04
10.9
9/1/04
10.10*
form of stock option agreement under the microsoft corporation 2001 stock plan
10-k
6/30/04
10.12
9/1/04
10.11*
form of stock option agreement for non-employee directors under the 1999 stock plan for non-employee directors
10-k
6/30/04
10.13
9/1/04
10.12
2009 officers indemnification trust agreement between microsoft corporation and the bank of new york mellon trust company, as trustee
10-k
6/30/10
10.12
7/30/10
10.13
amended and restated 2003 indemnification trust agreement between microsoft corporation and the bank of new york mellon trust company, as trustee
10-k
6/30/10
10.13
7/30/10
10.14*
microsoft corporation deferred compensation plan for non-employee directors
10-k
6/30/15
10.14
7/31/15
10.17*
executive officer incentive plan
10-q
9/30/15
10.17
10/22/15
table of contents
part iv  item 15
incorporated by reference
exhibitnumber
exhibit description
filed
herewith
form
period
ending
exhibit
filingdate
10.18*
form of executive officer incentive plan stock award agreement under the microsoft corporation 2001 stock plan
10-q
9/30/15
10.18
10/22/15
10.19*
resignation agreement and full and final release of claims between microsoft corporation and steven sinofsky
10-k
6/30/13
10.19
7/30/13
10.21*
stock award agreement under the microsoft corporation 2001 stock plan (service-based)
10-q
9/30/15
10.21
10/22/15
10.22*
senior executive severance benefit plan
10-q
9/30/15
10.22
10/22/15
10.23*
offer letter, dated february 3, 2014, between microsoft corporation and satya nadella
8-k
10.1
2/4/14
10.24*
long-term performance stock award agreement between microsoft corporation and satya nadella
10-q
12/31/14
10.24
1/26/15
10.25*
form of executive officer incentive plan performance stock award agreement under the microsoft corporation 2001 stock plan
10-q
9/30/15
10.25
10/22/15
computation of ratio of earnings to fixed charges
x
subsidiaries of registrant
x
23.1
consent of independent registered public accounting firm
x
31.1
certifications of chief executive officer pursuant to section 302 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002
x
31.2
certifications of chief financial officer pursuant to section 302 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002
x
32.1**
certifications of chief executive officer pursuant to section 906 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002
x
32.2**
certifications of chief financial officer pursuant to section 906 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002
x
101.ins
xbrl instance document
x
101.sch
xbrl taxonomy extension schema
x
101.cal
xbrl taxonomy extension calculation linkbase
x
101.def
xbrl taxonomy extension definition linkbase
x
101.lab
xbrl taxonomy extension label linkbase
x
101.pre
xbrl taxonomy extension presentation linkbase
x
*
indicates a management contract or compensatory plan or arrangement
**
furnished, not filed
***
form 8-k of linkedin corporation
table of contents
signatures
pursuant to the requirements of section13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this report to be
signed on its behalf by the undersigned; thereunto duly authorized, in the city of redmond, state of washington, on july28, 2016.
microsoft corporation
/s/frank h. brod
frank h. brod
corporatevicepresident,financeandadministration; chiefaccountingofficer(principalaccountingofficer)
pursuant to the requirements of the securities exchange act of 1934, this report has been signed below by the
following persons on behalf of registrant and in the capacities indicated on july28, 2016.
signature
title
/s/john w.
thompson
john w. thompson
chairman
/s/satya
nadella
satya nadella
director and chief executive officer
/s/william h. gates
iii william h. gates
iii
director
/s/teri l.
list-stoll teri l. list-stoll
director
/s/g. mason
morfit
g. mason morfit
director
/s/charles h.
noski
charles h. noski
director
/s/helmut
panke
helmut panke
director
/s/sandra e.
peterson
sandra e. peterson
director
/s/charles w.
scharf
charles w. scharf
director
/s/john w.
stanton
john w. stanton
director
/s/padmasree
warrior
padmasree warrior
director
/s/amy e.
hood
amy e. hood
executive vice president and chief financial officer
(principal financial officer)
/s/frank h.
brod
frank h. brod
corporatevicepresident,financeandadministration; chiefaccounting officer (principal accounting officer)
