10-k
j8640_10k.htm
10-k
united
states securities and exchange commission
washington, d.c. 20549
form 10-k
annual report pursuant to
section 13 or 15(d) of the securities
exchange act of 1934
for the fiscal year ended december
31, 2002
or
o transition report pursuant to
section 13 or 15(d) of the securities
exchange act of 1934
for
the transition period
fromto
commission
file number 001-10898
the st.
paul companies, inc.
(exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
minnesota
41-0518860
(state or other
jurisdiction of
incorporation or organization)
(i.r.s. employer
identification no.)
washington street, saint paul, mn
(address of
principal executive offices)
(zip code)
registrants
telephone number,
including area code
651-310-7911
securities
registered pursuant to section 12(b) of the act:
common
stock (without par value)
new
york stock exchange
(title of class)
(name of each
exchange on which registered)
guarantee
with respect to the 7.6% trust preferred
securities of st. paul capital trust i
new
york stock exchange
(title of class)
(name of each
exchange on which registered)
equity
units
new
york stock exchange
(title of class)
(name of each
exchange on which registered)
securities
registered pursuant to section 12(g) of the act:
none.
indicate by check mark
whether the registrant (1) has filed all reports required to be filed by
section 13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934 during the preceding
12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file
such reports), and (2) has been subject to such filing requirements for the
past 90 days.
yes noo
indicate by check mark if
disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to item 405 of regulation s-k is not
contained herein, and will not be contained, to the best of registrants
knowledge, in definitive proxy or information statements incorporated by
reference in part iii of this form 10-k or any amendment to this form 10-k. o
indicate by check mark
whether the registrant is an accelerated filer (as defined in exchange act rule
12b-2).
yes noo
the aggregate market
value of the outstanding common stock held by nonaffiliates of the registrant
on march 14, 2003, was $7,089,347,720.
the number of shares of the registrants common stock, without par
value, outstanding at march 14, 2003,
was 227,342,179.
an exhibit index
is set forth at page 52 of this report.
documents
incorporated by reference
portions of the
registrants 2002 annual report to shareholders is incorporated by reference
into parts i, ii and iv of this report.
portions of the registrants proxy statement relating to the annual
meeting of shareholders to be held may6, 2003 are incorporated by
reference into parts iii and iv of this report.
the
st. paul companies, inc.
annual
report on form 10-k
for
fiscal year ended december 31, 2002
table of contents
item
number
description
page
part i
1.
business
2.
properties
3.
legal proceedings
4.
submission
of matters to vote of security holders
executive officers
of the st. paul
part ii
5.
market
for registrants common equity and related stockholder matters
6.
selected financial data
7.
managements
discussion and analysis of financial conditions and results of operations
7a.
quantitative
and qualitative disclosures about market risk
8.
financial
statements and supplementary data
9.
changes
in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and financial disclosure
part iii
10.
directors
and executive officers of the registrant
11.
executive compensation
12.
security
ownership of certain beneficial owners and management and related stockholder
matters
13.
certain
relationships and related transactions
14.
controls and
procedures
part iv
15.
exhibits,
financial statement schedules, and reports on form 8-k
signatures
certifications
consolidated financial
statements and schedules
exhibit index
note: all references
herein to page numbers in our 2002 annual report to shareholders apply to the
printed versions of said report.
part i
item 1. business.
general description
the st. paul companies,
inc. (the st. paul) is incorporated as a general business corporation under
the laws of the state of minnesota. the
st. paul and its subsidiaries constitute one of the oldest insurance
organizations in the united states, dating back to 1853. we are a management company principally
engaged, through our subsidiaries, in providing commercial property-liability
insurance products and services. we
also have a presence in the asset management industry through our 79% majority
ownership of nuveen investments, inc.
as a management company, we oversee the operations of our subsidiaries
and provide them with capital, management and administrative services. at march 1, 2003, the st. paul and its
subsidiaries employed approximately 9,700 persons. based on total revenues in 2001, we ranked no. 218 on the fortune 500
list of the largest companies in the united states. our internet website address is stpaul.com. we make available, free of charge, on or
through our website, annual reports on form 10-k, quarterly reports on form
10-q and current reports on form 8-k and amendments to those reports filed or
furnished pursuant to section 13(a) or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of
1934 as soon as reasonably practicable after we electronically file such
material with, or furnish it to, the securities and exchange commission. our website address is an inactive textual
reference only and the contents of the website are not part of this report.
summary of results
the following table
summarizes the st. pauls consolidated results for each of the years in the
three-year period ended december 31, 2002.
years ended december 31
(in millions, except per share
data)
pretax
income (loss):
property-liability
insurance
$
$
(1,400
)
$
1,467
asset
management
parent
company and other operations
(230
)
(173
)
(201
)
pretax
income (loss) from continuing operations
(1,431
)
1,401
income
tax expense (benefit)
(73
)
(422
)
income
(loss) from continuing operations before cumulative effect of accounting
change
(1,009
)
cumulative
effect of accounting change, net of taxes
(6
)
income
(loss) from continuing operations
(1,009
)
discontinued
operations, net of taxes
(25
)
(79
)
net
income (loss)
$
$
(1,088
)
$
net
income (loss) per common share (diluted)
$
0.92
$
(5.22
)
$
4.24
our pretax income from
continuing operations of $176 million in 2002 included a $472 million loss
provision, net of reinsurance, related to a settlement agreement we entered
into with respect to the western macarthur asbestos litigation (described in
more detail on page 4 of this report).
in 2001, our pretax loss of $1.43 billion was dominated by $941 million
of pretax losses resulting from the september 11, 2001 terrorist attack and
pretax provisions totaling $735 million to strengthen prior-year loss reserves
in our health care segment. excluding
the western macarthur loss, the losses from the terrorist attack and the 2001 loss
provision in the health care segment, our pretax income in 2002 of $648 million
was significantly better than 2001 pretax income of $245 million, primarily due
to strong improvement in underwriting results in our ongoing property-liability
business segments. our majority-owned
asset management subsidiary, nuveen investments, inc., achieved another year of
record results, driven by strong product sales and recent strategic
acquisitions. the pretax loss in the
parent company and other operations category (which primarily consists of
management, administrative and debt service expenses at the holding company
level) exceeded the comparable loss in 2001 primarily due to an increase in
distributions related to preferred securities issued in the fourth quarter of
2001.
in the fourth quarter of
2002, we revised our segment reporting structure in our property-liability
underwriting operations. our ongoing
operations are now reported in four segments, and the operations we consider to
be in runoff are reported in three segments.
in our ongoing segments, written premium volume of $5.89 billion in 2002
grew 22% over comparable 2001 volume of $4.84 billion, driven by strong price
increases throughout these segments in addition to new business in many of
those operations. in our runoff
segments, premium volume of $1.16 billion in 2002 was 60% less than 2001
written premiums of $2.93 billion, reflecting the impact of our decision to
exit those operations.
the following discussion
summarizes major transactions or events that occurred in 2002.
transfer of ongoing reinsurance operations to platinum
underwriters holdings, ltd. in november 2002, we
completed the transfer of our ongoing reinsurance business (previously
operating under the name st. paul re) to platinum underwriters holdings, ltd.
(platinum), a newly formed bermuda company that underwrites property and
casualty reinsurance on a worldwide basis.
as part of this transaction, we contributed $122 million of cash
to platinum and transferred $349 million in assets relating to the insurance
reserves that we also transferred. in
exchange, we acquired six million common shares, representing a 14% equity
ownership interest in platinum, and a ten-year option to buy up to six million
additional common shares at an exercise price of $27 per share, which
represents 120% of the initial public offering price of platinums shares. the transaction resulted in a pretax gain of
$29 million and an after-tax loss of $54 million. the after-tax loss was driven by the write-off of approximately
$73 million in deferred tax assets associated with previously incurred losses
related to st. paul res united kingdom-based operations, as well as
approximately $10 million in taxes associated with the pretax gain. the transfer of ongoing reinsurance
operations to platinum underwriters holdings, ltd. section of managements
discussion and analysis on page 24 of our 2002 annual report to shareholders
contains further information about the platinum transaction and is incorporated
herein by reference.
asbestos settlement agreement. on june 3, 2002, we announced that we and
certain of our subsidiaries had entered into an agreement settling all existing
and future claims arising from any insuring relationship of united states
fidelity and guaranty company (usf&g), st. paul fire and marine insurance
company (fire and marine) and their affiliates and subsidiaries, including
us, with any of macarthur company, western macarthur company (western
macarthur), and western asbestos company (western asbestos) (together, the
macarthur companies). the pretax
impact on our 2002 results, net of expected reinsurance recoveries and the
re-evaluation and application of asbestos and environmental reserves, was
approximately $472 million ($307 million after-tax). we made payments of $235 million in june 2002 and $740 million in
january 2003 related to the settlement agreement. the asbestos settlement agreement section of managements
discussion and analysis on pages 27 and 28 of our 2002 annual report to
shareholders contains further details about this settlement agreement and is
incorporated herein by reference.
issuance of common stock and equity units. in july 2002, we sold 17.8 million of our
common shares in a public offering for gross consideration of $431 million, or
$24.20 per share. in a separate
concurrent public offering, we sold 8.9 million equity units, each having a
stated amount of $50, for gross consideration of $443 million. each equity unit initially consists of a
three-year forward purchase contract for our common stock and our unsecured $50
senior note due in august 2007. total
annual distributions on the equity units are at the rate of 9.00%, consisting
of interest on the note at a rate of 5.25% and fee payments under the forward
contract of 3.75%. the forward contract
requires the investor to purchase, for $50, a variable number of shares of our
common stock on the settlement date of august 16, 2005. the $46 million present value of the forward
contract fee payments was recorded as a reduction to our reported common
shareholders equity. the number of
shares to be purchased will be determined based on a formula that considers the
average trading price of the stock immediately prior to the time of settlement
in relation to the $24.20 per share price at the time of the offering. had the settlement date been december 31,
2002, we would have issued approximately 15 million common shares based on the
average trading price of our common stock immediately prior to that date.
the combined net proceeds
of these offerings, after underwriting commissions and other fees and expenses,
were approximately $842 million, of which $750 million was contributed as
capital to our insurance underwriting subsidiaries.
consolidated revenues
the following table
summarizes the sources of our consolidated revenues from continuing operations
for each of the years 2000 through 2002.
following the table is a narrative description of each of our business
segments. additional financial
information about revenues and pretax income or losses attributable to each of
our business segments is set forth in note 21 to our consolidated financial
statements included on pages 86 through 88 of our 2002 annual report to
shareholders, which is incorporated herein by reference. all data for 2001 and 2000 in the following
table are presented on a basis consistent with our new segment reporting
structure implemented in the fourth quarter of 2002 and described in more
detail following the table.
years
ended december 31
percentage of consolidated revenues
property-liability
insurance:
underwriting
ongoing segments:
specialty
commercial
20.8
%
15.8
%
13.8
%
commercial
lines
19.7
16.9
17.5
surety
& construction
12.8
10.4
9.8
international
& lloyds
8.1
6.6
3.2
subtotal
ongoing segments
61.4
49.7
44.3
runoff
segments:
health
care
5.3
7.7
7.2
reinsurance
12.0
17.9
14.1
other
4.2
6.5
4.8
subtotal
runoff segments
21.5
32.1
26.1
total
underwriting segments
82.9
81.8
70.4
investment
operations segment:
net
investment income
13.0
13.4
15.7
realized
investment gains (losses)
(1.8
)
(1.4
)
7.9
total
investment operations segment
11.2
12.0
23.6
other
1.3
1.4
0.9
total
property-liability insurance
95.4
95.2
94.9
asset
management segment
4.4
4.2
4.7
parent
company and other operations
0.2
0.6
0.4
total
100.0
%
100.0
%
100.0
%
narrative description of business
property-liability insurance
in the fourth quarter of
2002, we revised our property-liability business segment reporting structure to
reflect the manner in which those businesses are currently managed, including
in recognition of certain operations being separately managed as runoff
operations.
as of december 31, 2002,
our property-liability underwriting operations consisted of four segments
constituting our ongoing operations, and three segments comprising our runoff
operations. we retained the concept of
a specialty commercial business center, which is an operation possessing
dedicated underwriting, claims and risk control services requiring specialized
expertise and focusing exclusively on the customers it serves. eleven of those business centers comprise
our specialty commercial
reportable segment. in addition to our
underwriting segments, we have an investment operations segment responsible for
administering and overseeing our property-liability investment portfolio.
the following is a
summary of the changes made to our reporting segments at the end of 2002.
in
our specialty commercial segment,
all international specialty business that had either been included in
respective business centers, or had been included in the separate international specialty business center,
was reclassified to the newly formed international
& lloyds segment (for ongoing operations) or our other segment (for international
operations considered to be in runoff).
all
international health care business, previously included in the health care segment, was reclassified to
the newly formed other segment.
the
international & lloyds
segment was formed, comprised of our ongoing operations at lloyds, ongoing
specialty commercial business underwritten outside the united states (currently
consisting of operations in the united kingdom, canada and the republic of
ireland), including our global accounts business center. all operations in this segment are under
common management.
the
new runoff segment other was
formed, comprised of all of our international and lloyds business considered
to be in runoff (including our involvement in insuring the lloyds central
fund), as well as unionamerica, the u.k.-based underwriting entity we acquired
in our purchase of mmi companies, inc. in 2000.
our
catastrophe risk business center,
previously included in the specialty
commercial segment in its entirety, was split into two operations,
with personal catastrophe risk
remaining in the specialty commercial
segment and commercial catastrophe risk moving
to the commercial lines segment
as part of the property solutions
business center.
our business segments
underwrite property and liability insurance and provide insurance-related
products and services to commercial and professional customers throughout the
united states and in selected international markets. in the united states, our largest primary insurance underwriting
subsidiary is fire and marine. the
primary sources of property-liability revenues are premiums earned from
insurance policies and reinsurance contracts, income earned from the investment
portfolio and gains from sales of investments.
according to the most recent industry statistics published in bests
review with respect to commercial lines property-liability insurers doing
business in the united states, our property-liability underwriting operations
ranked as the fourth-largest on the basis of 2001 direct written premiums.
principal departments and products
in general, our property-liability
insurance operations underwrite the following types, or lines, of property
and liability coverages.
general
liability, which provides coverage for liability exposures including personal
injury and property damage arising from general business operations, products
sold and completed work;
liability
coverages for corporations and nonprofit organizations, including their
directors and officers, and for a variety of professionals such as lawyers,
insurance agents and real estate agents;
property
insurance, which insures tangible property for loss, damage or loss of use;
commercial
multi-peril, which provides a combination of property coverage (for damages
such as those caused by fire, wind, hail, water, theft, and vandalism) and
liability coverage (for third-party liability from accidents occurring on the
insureds premises or arising out of their operations);
commercial
auto, which provides coverage for businesses against losses resulting from
their ownership, maintenance or use of automobiles and trucks, including losses
resulting from bodily injury to third parties, physical damage to an insureds
vehicle and property damage to other vehicles and other property;
workers
compensation, which provides coverage for employers for specified benefits payable
under state or federal law for workplace injuries, disabilities or death to
employees, without regard to fault;
inland
marine, which provides coverage for property which is generally mobile in
nature, such as contractors equipment or cargo being shipped by truck or rail,
as well as instrumentalities of transportation or communication such as
bridges, tunnels and computers, and certain property risks such as builders
risk;
contract
surety bonds and commercial surety bonds; and
umbrella
coverages, which provide specified layers of coverage on accounts where we do
not provide the primary liability coverage.
further information about
these lines of business, including types of coverage that are specific to an
operating segment, are included in the segment descriptions that follow this
section.
through one or more lines
underwritten by our business segments, including property and general
liability, we are exposed to losses from environmental claims and mold
claims. environmental claims include
claims of liability for alleged damage from hazardous or toxic materials. the majority of our general liability
policies include an absolute pollution exclusion; however, in several business
centers, particularly oil and gas
and umbrella/excess & surplus lines in
our specialty commercial segment, we continue to underwrite new business with
limited pollution coverage. under
certain policies we underwrite, we are exposed to losses from claims of mold
and moisture infiltration, which can cause personal injury and damage to
property. certain policyholders have
submitted claims to us under their property and general liability polices that
include damages related to the presence of mold. predominantly, these mold claims are for property damage
submitted under a first-party property policy, or for construction defect
third-party liability submitted under a general liability policy. few personal injury claims related to mold
under workers compensation or general liability policies have been submitted
to us. the cause and type of damage of
each property damage or bodily injury incident involving mold determines
whether the claim may be a covered loss under a property policy or if there is
a duty to defend and/or indemnify an insured in a third-party claim. in
addition, we have exposure to claims arising from the use of asbestos in
building materials and construction. .
the environmental and asbestos claims section of managements
discussion and analysis included on pages 48 and 49 of our 2002 annual report to
shareholders, which includes a discussion of our historical exposure to and
losses from asbestos and environmental claims, is incorporated herein by
reference.
the underwriting results
by segment table in managements discussion and analysis included on page 36
of our 2002 annual report to shareholders, which summarizes written premiums,
underwriting results, statutory combined ratios and adjusted combined ratios
(as described in the footnote to the table) for each of our underwriting
segments for the last three years, is incorporated herein by reference. the following discussion provides more
information about the structure of, and products offered by, our
property-liability insurance underwriting segments.
ongoing
business segments
specialty commercial.
this segment consists of business centers that we have designated
specialty commercial operations because each provides dedicated underwriting,
claim and risk control services that require specialized expertise, and each
focuses exclusively on the respective customers it serves. insurance coverage is often provided on
proprietary insurance forms. those
business centers, which collectively generated $1.99 billion of net written
premiums in 2002 (accounting for 34% of our ongoing segments premium volume
and 28% of our consolidated written premium volume) and operate exclusively in
the united states, are as follows.
financial
& professional services provides property and liability
coverages for financial institutions, professional liability and management
liability coverages for corporations and nonprofit organizations against losses
caused by the negligence or misconduct of named directors and officers, and
errors and omissions coverages for a variety of professionals such as lawyers,
insurance agents and real estate agents for liability from errors and omissions
committed in the course
of professional conduct or practice.
although we have not observed any notable increase in directors and
officers claims in this business center, in view of recent allegations of
corporate malfeasance and professional misconduct, the sarbanes-oxley act of
2002 (and regulations issued by the securities and exchange commission pursuant
to that law), and the general decline in the securities markets, the frequency
and severity of such claims could increase.
technology
offers a portfolio of specialty products and services to companies involved in
telecommunications, information technology, health sciences and electronics
manufacturing. these products include
property, commercial auto, general liability, workers compensation, umbrella,
internet liability, and technology errors and omissions coverages. the services provided by this business
center include dedicated underwriting, risk control and specialized claim
handling.
umbrella/excess & surplus lines consists
of three distinct business units. the specialty excess and umbrella unit focuses
on umbrella and excess liability business for retail agents and brokers, where
other insurance companies are providing the primary coverage. the coverages underwritten are typically
commercial auto, general liability and product liability. umbrella coverage may also be underwritten
over a company that retains risk or has a self-insured retention, instead of a
scheduled underlying policy. the excess & surplus lines unit
underwrites non-admitted individual risk business for established wholesale
distributors. the coverages typically
underwritten include commercial auto, general liability and product
liability. the e&s underwriting facilities unit
underwrites liability and property facilities produced by wholesalers and
managing general agents, which are licensed insurance agents that manage all or
part of an insurers customers with unique requirements - primarily those with
moderate to high hazard exposures requiring expertise in the surplus lines
marketplace and the ability to use policy forms not subject to regulatory
requirements. coverages include
property, commercial auto, general liability and a small amount of umbrella.
public
sector services markets insurance products and services to
municipalities, counties, indian nation gaming and selected special government
districts, including water and sewer utilities, and non-rail transit
authorities. the policies written by
this business center typically cover property, commercial auto, general
liability, workers compensation and errors and omissions exposures.
discover re, which principally provides
commercial auto liability, general liability, workers compensation, and
property coverages, serves retail brokers and insureds that are committed to
the alternative risk transfer (art) market.
alternative risk transfer techniques are typically utilized by
sophisticated insureds that are financially able to assume a substantial
portion of their own losses. discover re
is organized in two underwriting units, each of which underwrites primary
insurance in connection with arrangements that involve the client or a captive
insurer agreeing to bear much of the covered risk. the individual risk unit markets products to individual insureds
that are comfortable retaining the more predictable layer of their expected
losses, whether it be a large deductible or a true self-insured retention. under a large deductible structure we are
exposed not only to the risk of loss under the policy but also to the risk of
the insureds inability or unwillingness to pay its obligations under the terms
of the agreement. we mitigate the
latter risk by collateralizing all or a portion of the expected losses in the
insureds retained layer. the second
underwriting unit is the captive/program unit, which focuses on captive
business. similar to the individual
risk accounts, the captives retain the more predictable frequency layer of
expected losses, with discover re providing excess coverage
above the captives retention. in some
instances the captive/program unit may retain little or no risk, but earns
revenues primarily from fees collected for providing access to policies from an
admitted insurance company.
specialty
programs underwrites insurance programs for selected
industries that are national in scope and have similar risk characteristics,
including franchises and associations in the entertainment, rental, propane,
and rural electric industries. specific
lines of insurance written by these business centers include property,
commercial auto, general liability, workers compensation, inland marine, errors
and omissions, umbrella and fidelity.
underwriting guidelines, premiums and policy forms issued by this
business segment vary by program and by jurisdiction because of local market
conditions and legal requirements.
coverage may be on a primary or an excess basis, depending on how the
coverage is structured for a particular insured. because of the national scope of the programs written by this
business center, we may be exposed to unusually large losses if a single
industry whose members are insured through an association is adversely affected
by a major event or development, to the extent that the event or development
causes losses throughout the industry.
oil and gas
provides specialized property and liability products for customers involved in
the exploration and production of oil and gas including operators, drillers and
servicing contractors. the policies
written by this business center insure drilling rigs, natural gas facilities,
pipelines, production and gathering platforms, and cover risks including
physical damage, liability and business interruption.
ocean
marine underwrites a diverse portfolio of coverages for all
forms of marine transportation and the companies that serve them, as well as
other businesses involved in international trade. our product offerings fall under four main coverage
categories: marine liability; cargo;
hull and machinery, protection and indemnity; and marine property-liability.
personal
catastrophe risk underwrites personal property coverages in
certain states exposed to earthquakes and hurricanes, including principally
california and florida. as with our
commercial catastrophe risk coverages underwritten in our commercial lines
segment, a single loss event may produce heavy losses under a number of
policies. we attempt to manage the risk
to which we are exposed through natural catastrophe reinsurance coverage. the natural catastrophe risk management
section of managements discussion and analysis included on page 26 of our 2002
annual report to shareholders, which includes a discussion of our natural
catastrophe risk management procedures, is incorporated herein by reference.
commercial lines. this segment generated $1.83 billion of net written premiums in
2002 (accounting for 31% of our ongoing segments premium volume and 26% of our
consolidated written premium volume).
the commercial lines
segment includes our small commercial,
middle market commercial and property solutions business centers, as
well as the results of our limited involvement in insurance pools. small
commercial services commercial firms that typically have between one
and fifty employees through its proprietary st.paul mainstreet (sm) and
st.paul advantage
(sm) products, with a particular focus on offices,
wholesalers, retailers, artisan contractors and other service risks.
the middle market commercial business center
offers insurance coverages for a wide variety of manufacturing, wholesale,
service and retail enterprises for which annual insurance costs typically range
from $75,000 to $1 million. this
business center also offers loss-sensitive casualty programs, including
significant deductible and self-insured retention options, for the higher end
of the middle market sector.
the property
solutions business center combines our large account property
business with the commercial portion of our catastrophe risk business and
allows us to take a unified approach to large commercial property risks. large accounts are typically those with
property premiums greater than $100,000.
this business center focuses on underwriting property coverages for real
properties exposed to light to moderate hazards, such as hotels and office
buildings, rather than high hazard properties such as petrochemical, mining and
other basic process industries. many of
the products underwritten by this business center are structured products, in
which we write coverage for a specified layer of risk and other insurers
underwrite other layers. because this
business center includes our previous commercial catastrophe risk business,
some of the policies underwritten by it expose us to catastrophe risk,
principally earthquake and hurricane, in which a single loss event can produce
heavy losses under a number of policies.
the structuring, or layering, of risk as described above results in our
being less exposed (before the effect of reinsurance) to such
catastrophe risk than if we wrote traditional full
limits property policies. to further
manage our risk, we purchase reinsurance coverage for catastrophe
exposures. our efforts to manage the
risk to which we are exposed from natural catastrophe coverage, which are
described in the natural catastrophe risk management section of managements
discussion and analysis, is incorporated by reference in this form 10-k at item
7. in november 2002, president bush
signed into law the terrorism risk insurance act of 2002. a description of the provisions of this act,
and their potential impact on us, is included in the terrorism risk and
legislation section of managements discussion and analysis included on pages
25 and 26 of our 2002 annual report to shareholders, which is incorporated
herein by reference.
results from our
participation in insurance pools and associations, which provide specialized
underwriting skills and risk management services for the classes of business
that they underwrite, are also included in the commercial lines segment. these
pools and associations serve to increase the underwriting capacity of participating
companies for insurance policies where the concentration of risk is so high or
the amount at risk is so large that a single company could not prudently accept
the entire risk. we limit our participation in these pools and associations.
surety & construction. we consider our surety & construction
segment a specialty operation, because each business requires specialized
underwriting, risk management and claim expertise. these operations, which accounted for $1.27 billion of net
written premium volume in 2002 (accounting for 22% of our ongoing segments
premium volume and 18% of our consolidated written premium volume), are
included in the same segment because of their shared customer base and
executive management, as well as the similarity in expertise required to
underwrite these coverages.
according to data
published by the surety association of america, our domestic surety operations
were the second largest in the united states based on 2001 direct premiums
written. in addition to its u.s. operations,
our surety business center also includes afianzadora insurgentes, the leading
surety underwriter in mexico, and our canadian operations, st. paul guarantee
and northern indemnity, which, on a combined basis, make us the largest surety
bond underwriter in canada.
our surety business center underwrites surety
bonds, which are agreements under which one party (the surety) guarantees to
another party (the owner or obligee) that a third party (the contractor or
principal) will perform in accordance with contractual or legal
obligations. the surety is responsible
for evaluating the risk to be covered and for determining if the principal
meets the underwriting requirements for the bond. the premium charged will reflect the size and type of the
obligation. by offering a bond, the
surety is offering assurance that its customer will meet its obligations as
specified under the bond.
our surety business
center was expanded by our march 2002 acquisition of st. paul guarantee in
canada (formerly london guarantee), and our acquisition in late 2001 of the
right to seek to renew surety business previously underwritten by firemans
fund insurance company.
for contract surety, we provide bid,
performance and payment bonds to a broad spectrum of clients specializing in
general contracting, highway and bridge construction, asphalt paving,
underground and pipeline construction, manufacturing, civil and heavy
engineering, and mechanical and electrical construction. bid bonds provide financial assurance that
bids have been submitted in good faith and that the contractor intends to enter
into the contract at the price bid and provide the required performance and
payment bonds. performance bonds
require us to fulfill the contractors obligations to the obligee should the contractor
fail to perform under the contract.
payment bonds guarantee that the contractor will pay certain
subcontractor, labor and material bills associated with a project.
for commercial surety, which comprises bonds
covering obligations often required by law, the bonds that we currently
underwrite are as follows.
license
and permit bonds, which are required by statutes or regulations for a number of
purposes, including guaranteeing the payment of certain taxes and fees and
providing consumer protection as a condition to granting licenses related to
selling real estate, including tax and customs bonds;
reclamation
bonds, which cover reclamation costs for mining and other industrial companies;
fiduciary
bonds, which are required by statutes, courts or contracts for the protection
of those on whose behalf a fiduciary (such as an executor of an estate or a
guardian of a minor) acts, including probate bonds and depository bonds;
court
bonds, which are bonds that may be required of either a plaintiff or a
defendant in a lawsuit;
public
official bonds, which are required by statutes and regulations to guarantee the
lawful and faithful performance of the duties of office by public officials;
indemnity
bonds, which are obligations to hold a third party harmless of damages related
to an underlying obligation to perform, maintain or pay;
workers
compensation self-insurer bonds, which are required by statutes and regulations
to guarantee the payment of workers compensation benefits to injured workers
of companies that wish to self-insure those obligations;
transfer
agent indemnity bonds, which protect the issuer of securities and the transfer
agent against the possibility that a lost share certificate may be presented
later by an innocent purchaser for value; and
other
miscellaneous bonds.
like contract surety
bonds, commercial surety bonds expose us to the risk that the principal - e.g.,
the fiduciary in a fiduciary bond or the mining company in a reclamation bond -
will not perform the duties required by the contract, applicable law or
regulation. accordingly, we underwrite
and price these products by analyzing, among other things, the principals
creditworthiness and ability to perform.
certain sectors of our
commercial surety business tend to be characterized by low frequency but
potentially high severity losses. in
october 2000, we made a strategic decision to significantly reduce the
exposures in these sectors. since that
time, we had reduced our total commercial surety gross open bond exposure by
over 40% by december 31, 2002.
within these sectors of
our commercial surety business, we have exposures related to a small number of
accounts, which are in various stages of bankruptcy proceedings. in addition, certain other accounts have
experienced deterioration in creditworthiness since we issued bonds to
them. given the current economic
climate and its impact on these companies, we may experience an increase in
claims and, possibly, incur high severity losses. such losses would be recognized in the period in which the claims
are filed and determined to be a valid loss under the provisions of the surety
bond issued.
we continue with our
intention to exit the segments of the commercial surety market discussed above
that are characterized by low frequency but potentially high severity bonds by
ceasing to write new business and, where possible, terminating the outstanding
bonds. we continue to be a market for
traditional commercial surety business, which includes low-limit business such
as license and permit, probate, public official, and customs bonds.
our construction business center offers a
variety of products and services, including traditional insurance, consisting
of workers compensation, general liability and commercial auto coverages, and
other risk management solutions, to a broad range of contractors and parties
responsible for construction projects.
international & lloyds. following the realignment of our business
segments in the fourth quarter of 2002, our international
& lloyds segment, which accounted for $808 million of net
written premium volume in 2002 (accounting for 14% of our ongoing segments
premium volume and 11% of our consolidated written premium volume), consists of
our ongoing operations at lloyds, and our ongoing specialty commercial
operations outside of the united states, including our global underwriting business center
(collectively referred to hereafter as international specialties).
lloyds is a subscription
insurance market in which member individuals and firms participate to provide
insurance to customers seeking coverage for a variety of risks. the members of lloyds are organized into
syndicates consisting of one or more members. the members provide underwriting capacity with which the
syndicate makes coverage available to particular customers. syndicates are operated by managing agencies
that receive fees in respect of the services they provide in both underwriting
and claims administration. coverage is
placed by insurance brokers acting on behalf of insureds.
through a single
wholly-owned syndicate at lloyds established in 1996 as syndicate 1211 and
re-branded as syndicate 5000 in november 2002, we underwrite insurance in four
principal lines of business: aviation,
marine, global property and
personal lines. aviation underwrites a broad spectrum of
international airline, manufacturer, airport and general aviation
business. marine underwrites energy, cargo and hull coverages. global
property underwrites property coverages worldwide. personal
lines provides specialized accident and health coverages for
international clients, including personal accident, kidnap and ransom, and
payment protection insurance. prior to
2003, the aviation and personal lines businesses were underwritten through
other syndicates that we managed and in which we participated with other
members of lloyds. we do not provide
syndicate 5000 with direct capital contributions but rather obtain bank letters
of credit to support the syndicates insurance exposure. we are liable, however, if these letters of
credit are insufficient to cover the syndicates losses and must reimburse the
banks that issue the letters of credit for any amounts they paid on our behalf.
in addition to the
property-liability business we underwrite at lloyds, we also manage, and have
made a commitment to provide 13% of the capacity of, syndicate 779 at lloyds,
which underwrites specialty term life insurance to individuals primarily in the
united kingdom and other european countries.
our ongoing international
specialties are located in the united kingdom, canada and the republic of
ireland, where we offer specialized insurance and risk management services to a
variety of industry sectors. our
ongoing international operations primarily underwrite employers liability
(similar to workers compensation coverage in the u.s.), public and product
liability (the equivalent of general liability), professional indemnity
(similar to directors and officers or errors and omissions coverage) and
property. the global underwriting business center
underwrites home-foreign business, representing coverage for a u.s.
organizations property-liability exposures in a foreign country, and
reverse-flow business, which involves coverage of a foreign organizations
property or liability exposures located in the country of the insurers
domicile, as part of a global program.
runoff
business segments
health care. the health
care segment, which generated $173 million in net written premiums
in 2002 (accounting for 15% of our runoff segments premium volume and 3% of
our consolidated written premium volume), historically provided a wide range of
medical liability insurance products and services for health care providers
throughout the entire health care delivery system, including individual
physicians, physician groups, hospitals, managed care organizations and
long-term care facilities, as well as certain traditional medical care
coverages. products include coverages
for healthcare professionals (physicians and surgeons, dental professionals and
nurses); individual healthcare facilities (including hospitals, long-term care
facilities and other facilities such as laboratories); and entire systems, such
as hospital networks and managed care systems.
typically the health care
segment underwrote coverages on the basis of an entire clinic, hospital or
other organization, so that we are exposed to losses from the malpractice of
any one practitioner on the staff of, or with privileges at, the
organization. policies written by this
segment are subject to high severity of claims. in the fourth quarter of 2001, we announced our intention to exit
the medical liability insurance market, subject to applicable regulatory
requirements. accordingly, this segment
was considered to be in runoff in 2002.
as part of the fourth-quarter 2002 revision of our segment reporting
structure, the international business previously included in this segment was
reclassified to the other segment.
reinsurance. our reinsurance
segment (formerly known as st. paul re) generated $751 million of net written
premiums in 2002 (accounting for 65% of our runoff segments premium volume and
11% of our consolidated written premium volume). in the years prior to 2002, our reinsurance
segment generally underwrote treaty and facultative reinsurance for property,
liability, ocean marine, surety, certain specialty classes of coverage, and
nontraditional reinsurance, which provided limited traditional underwriting
risk protection combined with financial risk protection.
in late 2001, we
announced our intention to cease underwriting certain types of reinsurance
coverages and narrow our geographic presence in 2002. in november 2002, we transferred our ongoing reinsurance
operations to platinum underwriters holdings, ltd. (platinum) while retaining
liabilities generally for reinsurance contracts incepting prior to january 1,
2002, as well as all liabilities relating to the flooding in europe in august
2002. note 2 to our consolidated
financial statements included on pages 67 and 68 of our 2002 annual report to shareholders
contains more information about the transfer of business to platinum and is
incorporated herein by reference.
our remaining in-force
pre-2002 exposures are principally in the following areas:
north
american casualty, which offered customers with exposures in the united states
and canada the following types of casualty reinsurance coverages: general,
workers compensation, auto, medical professional, non-medical professional,
directors and officers, employment practices, surplus lines, umbrella and
environmental impairment as well as accident and health reinsurance coverages;
international,
which underwrote property and casualty reinsurance for customers domiciled
outside of north america and marine and aerospace reinsurance for customers
located throughout the world;
finite
risk, which underwrote non-traditional reinsurance treaties including
multi-year excess-of-loss treaties, aggregate stop loss treaties, finite quota
share treaties, loss portfolio transfers, and adverse loss development covers;
and
certain
bond, credit and financial risk coverages.
other. our other
business segment, which accounted for $235 million of net written premiums in
2002 (accounting for 20% of our runoff segments premium volume and 3% of our
consolidated written premiums), was formed in the fourth quarter of 2002 upon
the revision of our segment reporting structure and is considered to be
entirely in runoff. we have a
management team in place for these operations whose goal is to ensure that our
outstanding claim obligations are settled in an expeditious and economical
manner. this segment includes the
results of the following international insurance operations.
runoff operations at lloyds, primarily
consisting of the following lines of business written through seven syndicates,
in which our ownership ranged from 32% to 100% as of december 31, 2002, and
comprising both u.s. and non-u.s. coverages: casualty insurance and
reinsurance, non-marine reinsurance, professional liability insurance (particularly
for financial customers, and directors and officers liability insurance) and
our participation in the insuring of the lloyds central fund.
unionamerica, the london-based
underwriting unit acquired as part of our purchase of mmi in 2000. unionamerica underwrote liability and
property coverages, including medical malpractice and other professional
liability and directors and officers liability, both inside and outside of
lloyds, on both an insurance and excess-of-loss reinsurance basis; and
all
other international runoff lines of business we decided to exit at the end of
2001, consisting of health care business in the united kingdom, canada and
ireland, as well as our underwriting operations in germany, france, the
netherlands, argentina, mexico (excluding surety business), spain, australia,
new zealand, botswana and south africa.
in december 2002, we sold our operations in argentina, mexico (excluding
our surety operations) and spain.
product
information
the following table
summarizes our net written premiums by product line for each of the years ended
december 31, 2002, 2001 and 2000.
year ended december 31
(in millions)
domestic
primary operations:
general
liability
$
$
$
property
commercial
auto
workers
compensation
surety
and fidelity
directors
& officers/errors & omissions
umbrella
medical
liability
commercial
multi-peril
ocean
marine
other
total
domestic primary operations
5,238
4,942
4,255
reinsurance
1,610
1,154
international
& lloyds
1,061
1,211
subtotal
7,046
7,763
6,303
premiums
ceded  corporate reinsurance program
(419
)
total
$
7,046
$
7,763
$
5,884
principal
markets and methods of distribution
our insurance operations
in the united states are licensed to transact business in all 50 states, the
district of columbia, puerto rico, guam and the virgin islands. at least five percent of our 2002 u.s.
property-liability direct written premiums were produced in each of california,
new york, texas, florida and illinois.
our primary insurance business in the united states is
produced primarily through over 4,000 independent insurance agencies and
insurance brokers. the needs of agents,
brokers and policyholders are addressed through approximately 100 offices
located throughout the united states.
discover re, a component of our specialty commercial segment,
underwrites alternative risk transfer business from its farmington, ct
headquarters and from regional offices in atlanta, pittsburgh, and san francisco.
our international
operations are headquartered in london and underwrite insurance primarily
through domestic operations in the united kingdom, canada and the republic of
ireland. we also underwrite surety
business in mexico.
through our involvement
at lloyds, we have access to insurance markets in virtually every country in
the world. at our ongoing operations at
lloyds, we underwrite property-liability business through a single, wholly
owned syndicate (syndicate 5000) and specialty life insurance through our 13%
participation in syndicate 779. our
managing agency, operating under the name st. paul syndicate management ltd.,
underwrites business for these syndicates, which represent approximately 3% of
lloyds total capacity.
reserves for losses and loss adjustment expenses
general information. when claims are made by or against
policyholders, any amounts that our underwriting operations pay or expect to
pay to the claimant are referred to as losses.
the costs of investigating, resolving and processing these claims are
referred to as loss adjustment expenses (lae). our loss reserves reflect estimates of total losses and lae we
will ultimately have to pay under insurance policies, surety bonds and
reinsurance agreements. the reserves
for unpaid losses and lae at december 31, 2002 cover claims that were incurred
not only in 2002 but also in prior years.
they include estimates of the total cost of claims that have already
been reported but not yet settled (case reserves), and those that have been
incurred but not yet reported (ibnr reserves). loss reserves are reduced for estimates of salvage and
subrogation.
loss reserves for tabular
workers compensation business and certain assumed reinsurance contracts are
discounted to present value. additional
information about these discounted liabilities is set forth in note 1 to our
consolidated financial statements included on pages 63 through 67 of our 2002
annual report to shareholders, and is incorporated herein by reference. during 2002, $14 million of discount was
amortized and $3 million of additional discount was accrued.
because many of the
coverages we offer involve claims that may not ultimately be settled for many
years after they are incurred, subjective judgments as to our ultimate exposure
to losses are an integral and necessary component of our loss reserving
process. we record our reserves by
considering a range of estimates bounded by a high and low point. within that range, we record our best
estimate. we continually review our
reserves, using a variety of statistical and actuarial techniques to analyze
current claim costs, frequency and severity data, and prevailing economic,
social and legal factors. we adjust
reserves established in prior years as loss experience develops and new
information becomes available.
adjustments to previously estimated reserves are reflected in results in
the year in which they are made.
while
we believe our reported reserves make a reasonable provision for all of our
unpaid loss and loss adjustment expense obligations, it should be noted that
the process of estimating required reserves does, by its very nature, involve
uncertainty. the level of uncertainty
can be influenced by such factors as the existence of long-tail coverages
(which we consider to be business in which the majority of coverages involve
average loss payment lags of three years or more beyond the expiration of the
policy), and changes in claim handling practices. many of our insurance subsidiaries have underwritten long-tail
coverages, and the primary lines of business fitting that criterion are general
liability, workers compensation and casualty excess reinsurance. in addition, claim handling practices change
and evolve over the years. for example,
new initiatives are commenced, claim offices are reorganized and relocated,
claim handling responsibilities of individual adjusters are changed, use of a
call center is increased, use of technology is increased, caseload issues and
case reserving practices are monitored more frequently, etc. furthermore, establishing reserves for our
reinsurance and retrocessional business is influenced by our need to rely on
the ceding insurers and reinsurers for information regarding reported claims. however, all of the above factors are
sources of uncertainty that we have recognized in establishing our reserves.
the loss and loss
adjustment expense reserves section of managements discussion and analysis
included in our 2002 annual report to shareholders includes more information
about our loss reserves, including an analysis of our long-tail exposures, and
is incorporated by reference in this form 10-k at item 7.
ten-year development. the table on page 18 presents a development
of net loss and lae reserve liabilities and payments for the years 1992 through
2002. the top line on the table shows
the estimated liability for unpaid losses and lae, net of reinsurance
recoverables, recorded at the balance sheet date for each of the years
indicated.
the table excludes the
reserves and activity of economy fire and casualty company and its subsidiaries
(economy), which were included in the sale of our standard personal insurance
operations to metropolitan property and casualty insurance company
(metropolitan) in 1999. the table
does, however, include reserves and activity for the non-economy standard
personal insurance business that was sold to metropolitan, since we remain
liable for claims on non-economy standard personal insurance policies that
result from losses occurring prior to sept. 30, 1999 (the closing date of the
sale). note 16 to our consolidated
financial statements, which includes additional information regarding the sale
of economy and the related reserves, is included on pages 81 and 82 of our 2002
annual report to shareholders and is incorporated herein by reference.
when we acquire an
insurance underwriting company, we include loss development for the acquired
company in the following table beginning with the date of acquisition; however,
that development includes activity from periods prior to our acquisition.
in 1997, we changed the
method by which we assign loss activity to a particular year for assumed
reinsurance written by our u.k.-based reinsurance operation, which, as noted
above, is now in runoff. prior to 1997,
that loss activity was assigned to the year in which the underlying reinsurance
contract was written. in 1997, our
analysis indicated that an excess amount of loss activity was being assigned to
prior years because of this practice.
as a result, we implemented an improved procedure in 1997 that more
accurately assigns loss activity for this business to the year in which it
occurred. this change had the impact of
increasing favorable development on previously established reserves by
approximately $110 million in 1997.
there was no net impact on total incurred losses, however, because there
was a corresponding increase in the provision for current year loss activity in
1997. development data for individual
years prior to 1997 in this table were not restated to reflect this new
procedure because reliable data to do so was not available.
the upper portion of the
table, which shows the re-estimated amounts relating to the previously recorded
liabilities, is based upon experience as of the end of each succeeding
year. these estimates are either
increased or decreased as further information becomes known about individual
claims and as changes in the trend of claim frequency and severity become
apparent.
the cumulative
redundancy (deficiency) line on the table for any given year represents the
aggregate change in the estimates for all years subsequent to the year the
reserves were initially established.
for example, the 1993 net reserve of $12,970 million developed to
$12,227 million, or a $743 million redundancy, by the end of 1995. by the end of 2002, the 1993 reserve had
developed a redundancy of $1,883 million.
the changes in the estimate of 1993 loss reserves were reflected in
operations during the past nine years.
likewise, the deficiency that developed with respect to year-end 2000
reserves (primarily related to our medical liability business) was reflected in
our results of operations for 2002 and 2001.
in 1993, we adopted the
provisions of sfas no. 113, accounting and reporting for reinsurance of
short-duration and long-duration contracts.
this statement required, among other things, that reinsurance recoverables
on unpaid losses and lae be shown as an asset, instead of the prior practice of
netting this amount against insurance reserves for balance sheet reporting
purposes.
the middle portion of the
table represents a reconciliation between the net reserve liability as shown on
the top line of the table and the gross reserve liability as shown on our
balance sheet. this portion of the
table also presents the gross re-estimated reserve liability as of the end of
the latest re-estimation period (december 31, 2002) and the related
re-estimated reinsurance recoverable.
the lower portion of the
table presents the cumulative amounts paid with respect to the previously
recorded liability as of the end of each succeeding year. for example, as of december 31, 2002, $8,976
million of the currently estimated $11,087 million of net losses and lae that
have been incurred for the years up to and including 1993 have been paid. thus, as of december 31, 2002, it is
estimated that $2,111 million of net incurred losses and lae have yet to be
paid for the years up to and including 1993.
caution should be
exercised in evaluating the information shown in this table. it should be noted that each amount includes
the effects of all changes in amounts for prior periods. for example, the portion of the development
shown for year-end 1998 reserves that relates to 1993 losses is included in the
cumulative redundancy (deficiency) for the years 1993 through 1998.
in addition, the table
presents calendar year data. it does
not present accident or policy year development data, which some readers may be
more accustomed to analyzing. the
social, economic and legal conditions and other trends which have had an impact
on the changes in the estimated liability in the past are not necessarily
indicative of the future. accordingly,
readers are cautioned against extrapolating any conclusions about future
results from the information presented in this table.
note 11 to our
consolidated financial statements included on pages 74 and 75 of our 2002
annual report to shareholders contains a reconciliation of beginning and ending
loss reserve liabilities for each of the years 2002, 2001 and 2000, and is
incorporated herein by reference.
additional information about our reserves is contained in the loss and
loss adjustment expense reserves and environmental and asbestos claims
sections of managements discussion and analysis on pages 46 through 49 of said
annual report, and in the health care section of managements discussion and
analysis on pages 40 through 43 of said annual report, which are also
incorporated herein by reference.
analysis of loss and loss adjustment expense (lae)
development
(in millions)
year ended
december 31
net
liability for unpaid losses and lae
$
13,195
12,970
12,997
13,464
14,689
14,704
14,813
14,042
13,545
15,253
14,849
liability
re-estimated as of:
one
year later
12,896
12,601
12,665
12,995
13,929
14,534
14,822
13,315
14,139
16,252
two
years later
12,574
12,227
12,227
12,289
13,703
14,534
14,097
13,183
15,050
three
years later
12,369
11,929
11,770
12,141
13,791
13,917
13,821
13,805
four
years later
12,129
11,567
11,621
12,195
13,395
13,502
14,165
five
years later
11,900
11,454
11,580
11,683
12,967
13,787
six
years later
11,802
11,404
11,197
11,316
13,224
seven
years later
11,763
11,112
10,876
11,547
eight
years later
11,640
10,843
11,104
nine
years later
11,395
11,087
ten
years later
11,682
cumulative
redundancy
(deficiency)
$
1,513
1,883
1,893
1,917
1,465
(1,505
)
(999
)
net
liability for unpaid losses and lae
$
13,195
12,970
12,997
13,464
14,689
14,704
14,813
14,042
13,545
15,253
14,849
reinsurance
recoverable on unpaid losses
3,904
2,581
2,533
2,824
2,864
3,051
3,199
3,678
4,651
6,848
7,777
gross
liability
17,099
15,551
15,530
16,288
17,553
17,755
18,012
17,720
18,196
22,101
22,626
gross
re-estimated liability:
one
year later
16,452
15,157
15,620
15,844
17,024
17,725
17,840
17,011
19,576
24,536
two
years later
16,128
15,181
15,257
15,105
16,787
17,466
16,813
17,111
21,988
three
years later
15,983
14,968
14,666
14,985
16,669
16,559
16,777
18,795
four
years later
15,810
14,500
14,675
14,743
15,881
16,259
17,956
five
years later
15,521
14,530
14,350
13,883
15,583
17,321
six
years later
15,549
14,234
13,688
13,576
16,610
seven
years later
15,406
13,813
13,375
14,781
eight
years later
15,187
13,501
14,570
nine
years later
14,878
14,711
ten
years later
16,133
gross
cumulative redundancy (deficiency)
$
1,507
(1,075
)
(3,792
)
(2,435
)
cumulative
amount of net liability paid through:
one
year later
$
3,008
2,723
2,641
2,893
3,335
3,518
3,950
3,769
4,574
5,416
two
years later
4,958
4,506
4,491
4,827
5,657
6,144
6,476
6,589
8,282
three
years later
6,249
5,778
5,817
6,309
7,444
7,906
8,354
8,941
four
years later
7,159
6,693
6,851
7,390
8,698
9,147
9,852
five
years later
7,824
7,423
7,648
7,857
9,465
10,205
six
years later
8,314
8,020
7,940
8,360
10,244
seven
years later
8,684
8,247
8,305
8,949
eight
years later
8,988
8,540
8,793
nine
years later
9,242
8,976
ten
years later
9,657
cumulative
amount of gross liability paid through:
one
year later
4,064
3,316
3,241
3,408
3,702
3,943
4,392
4,297
5,619
7,029
two
years later
6,572
5,489
5,491
5,386
6,310
6,796
7,170
7,632
10,235
three
years later
8,164
7,054
6,842
7,074
8,316
8,657
9,428
10,573
four
years later
9,290
7,989
8,034
8,289
9,559
10,168
11,329
five
years later
9,994
8,831
8,942
8,870
10,486
11,509
six
years later
10,582
9,540
9,311
9,478
11,519
seven
years later
11,177
9,866
9,758
10,290
eight
years later
11,511
10,231
10,454
nine
years later
11,833
10,871
ten
years later
12,446
the table shows that a
cumulative deficiency of $1,505 million had developed on year-end 2000 net
reserves by the end of 2002. the
primary contributors to this adverse development were the $735 million of
prior-year loss provisions recorded in 2001 related to medical malpractice
coverages in our health care segment, $217 million of adverse prior-year loss
development in our surety & construction segment recorded in 2002, and the
$472 million provision recorded in our commercial lines segment in 2002 related
to the western macarthur asbestos litigation settlement.
reinsurance
when we purchase
reinsurance or cede insurance premiums and risks, other insurers or
reinsurers agree to share certain risks that we have underwritten. the primary purpose of reinsurance is to
limit a ceding insurers maximum net loss from individually large or aggregate
risks as well as to provide protection against catastrophes. our reinsurance program is generally managed
from a corporate risk-tolerance perspective.
reinsurance contracts addressing specific business center risks are
utilized on a limited basis to cover unique exposures as necessary. our reinsurance program addresses risk
through a combination of per-risk reinsurance and reinsurance contracts
protecting against the aggregation of risk exposures. facultative reinsurance, which covers specific risks, is also
used to supplement our reinsurance program.
in the wake of the
september 11, 2001 terrorist attack, price increases and pressures on contract
terms and conditions continue in the reinsurance market. despite these constraints, our reinsurance
program continues to support our primary underwriting reinsurance needs,
particularly as increases in rates and reductions in limits also continue in
the reinsurance market.
after the terrorist
attack, reinsurers, in general, specifically excluded terrorism coverage from
property reinsurance treaties that subsequently renewed. as a result, in the second quarter of 2002,
we purchased limited specific terrorism coverage in the form of two separate
property reinsurance treaties  a per-risk terrorism treaty and a catastrophe
terrorism treaty. the per-risk treaty
provides coverage on a per-building, per-event basis for a loss of up to $110
million, after a first layer of $15 million of losses retained by us. the catastrophe terrorism treaty provides
coverage of up to $200 million in excess of the first $100 million of losses
resulting from catastrophic losses caused by terrorism. both treaties have one additional set of
limits for subsequent terrorism events and expire in april 2003. in addition, we have renewed the majority of
our reinsurance treaties covering workers compensation and general liability
business. thus far, those renewals
included coverage for terrorism. our
reinsurance treaties do not cover acts of terrorism involving nuclear,
biological or chemical events.
we have not determined
whether we will seek to renew our terrorism property reinsurance treaties upon
their expiration in april 2003, and, in any event, there can be no assurance
that we would be able to secure such terrorism reinsurance coverage with
acceptable terms, or at all, at that time.
approximately 98% of our
domestic reinsurance recoverable balances at december 31, 2002 were with
reinsurance companies having financial strength ratings of a- or higher by a.m
best or standard & poors, were from state sponsored facilities or
reinsurance pools, or were collateralized reinsurance programs associated with
certain of our insurance operations. we
have an internal credit security committee, which uses a comprehensive credit
risk review process in selecting our reinsurers. this process considers such factors as ratings by major ratings
agencies, financial condition, parental support, operating practices, and
market news and developments. the
credit security committee convenes quarterly to evaluate these factors and take
action on our approved list of reinsurers, as necessary.
we maintain an allowance
for uncollectible reinsurance, which is evaluated and adjusted on a regular
basis to reflect disputed coverages and changing market and credit
conditions. our allowance for
uncollectible reinsurance as a percentage of total reinsurance recoverable
balances was 1.5% and 1.6% as of december 31, 2002 and 2001, respectively. historically, our write-offs of
uncollectible reinsurance balances have averaged less than $3 million per year.
in 2000 and 2001, we
entered into two aggregate excess-of-loss reinsurance treaties. one of these treaties in each year was
corporate-wide, with coverage triggered when our insurance losses and lae
across all lines of business reached a certain level, as prescribed by terms of
the treaty (the corporate program).
we were not party to such a treaty in 2002. additionally, our reinsurance segment was impacted by cessions
made under a separate treaty in those years and 2002 unrelated to the corporate
treaty. the combined impact of these treaties (together, the reinsurance
treaties) is included in the table that follows.
years ended december 31
(in millions)
ceded
written premiums
$
(1
)
$
$
ceded
losses and loss adjustment expenses premiums
(35
)
ceded
earned premiums
(1
)
net
pretax benefit (detriment)
$
(34
)
$
$
the $35 million of
negative losses and loss adjustment expenses ceded in 2002 was related to the
reinsurance segment treaty and primarily resulted from a commutation of a
portion of that treaty. note 19 to our
consolidated financial statements on pages 85 and 86 of our 2002 annual report
to shareholders, which provides a schedule of ceded reinsurance and additional
information about the reinsurance treaties, is incorporated herein by
reference.
until the transfer of our
ongoing reinsurance operations to platinum in november 2002, we underwrote
assumed reinsurance coverages on a worldwide basis. we remain liable on all reinsurance contracts with inception
dates prior to january 1, 2002, as well as on certain 2002 contracts that were
not transferred to platinum.
property - liability investment
operations
our board of directors
approves the overall investment plan for the companies within the st. pauls
property-liability operations. each
subsidiary develops its own specific investment policy tailored to comply with
domestic laws and regulations and the overall corporate investment plan. the primary objectives of those plans are to
ensure our ability to meet our liabilities, primarily consisting of insurance
claim payments, and, having done that, to increase our shareholders equity.
the majority of funds
available for investment are deployed in a widely diversified portfolio of
predominantly investment-grade fixed income securities, consisting primarily of
government-issued securities and corporate bonds. we also invest much smaller amounts in equity securities, venture
capital and real estate. the latter
three investment classes have the potential for higher returns but also involve
varying degrees of risk, including less stable rates of return and less
liquidity.
the following discussion provides more information on
each of our invested asset classes.
fixed income securities. our portfolio of fixed income securities
constituted 75% (at cost) of our property-liability insurance operations
investment portfolio at december 31, 2002.
the portfolio is primarily composed of high-quality, intermediate-term
taxable u.s. government, foreign government, corporate and mortgage-backed
bonds, and tax-exempt u.s. municipal bonds.
the table on the following page presents information about the fixed maturity
portfolio for the years 2000 through 2002 (dollars in millions).
year
amortized
cost at
year-end
estimated
fair
value at year-end
weighted
average
pre-tax yield
weighted
average
after-tax yield
$
16,126
$
17,135
6.2
%
4.5
%
$
15,194
$
15,756
6.6
%
4.8
%
$
14,205
$
14,584
6.8
%
5.1
%
we participate in a
securities lending program whereby certain securities from our fixed income
portfolio are loaned to other institutions.
our policy is to require collateral equal to 102 percent of the fair
value of the loaned securities. we
maintain full ownership rights to the securities loaned, and continue to earn
interest on them. in addition, we have
the ability to sell the securities while they are on loan. we have an indemnification agreement with
the lending agents in the event a borrower becomes insolvent or fails to return
securities. we record securities
lending collateral as a liability and pay the borrower an agreed upon interest
rate. the proceeds from the collateral
are invested in short-term investments and are reported on the balance
sheet. we share a portion of the
interest earned on these short-term investments with the lending agent. the fair value of the securities on loan is
removed from fixed income securities on the balance sheet and shown as a
separate investment asset.
our decision whether to
purchase taxable or tax-exempt securities is driven by corporate tax
considerations, and the relationship between taxable and tax-exempt yields at
the time of purchase. in recent years,
the availability of corporate net operating loss carryforwards and alternative
minimum tax carryforwards has increased our ability to benefit from taxable
investment income. accordingly, a
significant majority of our new fixed income purchases in recent years have
consisted of taxable bonds. we carry
our fixed maturities on our balance sheet at their estimated fair value, with
unrealized appreciation and depreciation (net of taxes) recorded in common
shareholders equity.
we manage our bond
portfolio conservatively to provide reasonable returns while limiting exposure
to risks. at december 31, 2002,
approximately 97% of our fixed income portfolio, comprised of our fixed income
securities as well as the securities on loan and short-term investments, was
rated investment grade. the remaining
3% of this fixed income portfolio primarily consisted of high-yield bonds, and
also included non-rated securities, most of which we believe would be
considered investment-grade, if rated.
real estate and mortgage loans. our real estate holdings consist of a
diversified portfolio of commercial office and warehouse properties that we own
directly or have partial interest in through joint ventures. the properties are geographically
distributed throughout the united states and had an overall occupancy rate of
90% at december 31, 2002. we also have
a portfolio of real estate mortgage investments acquired in our merger with
usf&g corporation in 1998. the real
estate and mortgage loan portfolio produced $77 million of pretax investment
income in 2002 and generated $2 million of pretax realized gains.
venture capital. securities of small- to medium-sized companies spanning a variety
of industries comprise our venture capital holdings, which accounted for 3% of
property-liability investments (at cost) at december 31, 2002. venture capital investments generated pretax
realized investment losses of $200 million in 2002, driven by impairment write-downs
in the carrying value of certain of our investments and the sale of the
majority of our partnership investment holdings. the carrying $581 million value of venture capital investments at
december 31, 2002 included $4 million of pretax unrealized appreciation.
equities.
our equity holdings consist of a diversified portfolio of public common
stock, comprising 2% of total property-liability investments (at cost) at
year-end 2002. in may and june 2002, we
reduced our equity investments by $445 million, or 46% of the total outstanding
at the time (at cost), at a market level higher than that which prevailed for
the remainder of 2002. our decision to
reduce our public equity holdings was prompted by several factors, including
our opinion as to the near-term direction of equity prices, a comprehensive
evaluation of our aggregate equity exposure (including venture capital and
equities held by our pension fund), and our opinion as to the level of public
equity investments that is appropriate for publicly held insurance companies. by the end of 2002, we had reduced our
equity investments by $683 million (at cost) since year-end 2001.
short-term and other investments. our portfolio also includes short-term
securities and other miscellaneous investments (including our 14% equity
ownership stake in platinum and our warrants to purchase up to six million
additional common shares of platinum), which in the aggregate comprised 13% of
property-liability investments at december 31, 2002. also included in other investments at december 31, 2002 was an
approximately $400 million long-term interest-bearing security from a highly
rated entity, supporting a series of insurance transactions.
derivatives. our property-liability investment operations have had limited
involvement with derivative financial instruments, primarily for purposes of
hedging against fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates and interest
rates. effective january. 1, 2001, we
adopted the provisions of statement of financial standards (sfas) no. 133,
accounting for derivative instruments and hedging activities, as amended,
which required the recognition of all derivative instruments as either assets
or liabilities on the balance sheet.
note 10 to our consolidated financial statements on page 73 of our 2002
annual report to shareholders, which provides more information regarding the
impact of adopting sfas no. 133, is incorporated herein by reference.
in addition to note 10,
notes 1, 8 and 9 to our consolidated financial statements, which are included
in our 2002 annual report to shareholders, also provide additional information
about our investment portfolio and are incorporated herein by reference. the property-liability investment
operations on pages 44 through 46 and exposures to market risk sections of
managements discussion and analysis on pages 54 and 55 of our 2002 annual
report to shareholders are also incorporated herein by reference.
asset management
nuveen investments, inc.
(nuveen investments, formerly the john nuveen company) is our asset
management subsidiary. the st. paul and
its largest property-liability insurance subsidiary, fire and marine) hold a
combined 79% interest in nuveen investments.
nuveen investments core
businesses are asset management and related research, as well as the
development, marketing and distribution of investment products and services for
the affluent, high net worth and institutional market segments. nuveen investments distributes its
investment products and services, including individually managed accounts,
closed-end exchange-traded funds and mutual funds, to the affluent and high net
worth market segments through unaffiliated intermediary firms including
broker/dealers, commercial banks, affiliates of insurance providers, financial
planners, accountants, consultants and investment advisors. nuveen investments also provides managed
account services to several institutional market segments and channels.
nuveen investments
primary business activities generate three principal sources of revenue: (1)
advisory fees earned on assets under management, including exchange-traded
funds, separately managed accounts and mutual funds; (2) underwriting and
distribution revenues earned upon the sale of certain investment products and (3)
performance fees earned on certain institutional accounts based on the
performance of such accounts. advisory
fees accounted for 90% of nuveen investments total revenues in 2002.
nuveen investments
operations are carried on by eleven subsidiaries, including nuveen investments
llc (formerly nuveen investments), a registered broker and dealer in securities
under the securities exchange act of 1934, and eight investment advisory
subsidiaries registered under the investment advisers act of 1940. the eight investment advisory subsidiaries
are nuveen advisory corp. (nac), nuveen institutional advisory corp.
(niac), nuveen asset management inc. (nam), rittenhouse asset management,
inc. (rittenhouse), nuveen senior loan asset management, inc. (nslam),
symphony asset management llc (symphony), nwq investment management company,
inc. (nwq) and nuveen investment advisors, inc. nuveen investments llc provides investment product distribution
and related services for nuveens managed funds and defined portfolios. nac, niac and nslam provide investment
management services for and administer the business affairs of the nuveen
managed funds. rittenhouse, nwq,
symphony and nam provide investment management services for individual and
institutional managed accounts. rittenhouse, symphony and nwq also act as
sub-adviser and portfolio manager for mutual funds managed by niac. the other two subsidiaries are not
registered broker-dealers or investment advisors and do not provide product
distribution or investment management services for the company.
at december 31, 2002,
nuveen investments assets under management totaled $79.7 billion, consisting
of $39.9 billion of exchange-traded funds, $19.4 billion of retail managed
accounts, $8.5 billion of institutional managed accounts, and $11.9 billion of
mutual funds.
competition
property-liability insurance
the property-liability
insurance industry is highly competitive in the areas of price, service,
product offerings, technology and agent relationships. ratings issued by independent ratings
agencies are also a competitive factor in the insurance business. increasing the competitive pressure is the
current low interest rate environment that is impacting investment returns and
making underwriting decisions even more critical. our domestic and international insurance subsidiaries compete
with other stock companies, mutual companies, alternative risk sharing groups
and other underwriting organizations.
competitors in this market are primarily national property-liability
insurance companies willing to write most classes of business using traditional
products and pricing and, to a lesser extent, regional insurance companies and
companies that have developed niche programs for specific industry segments. in addition, many large commercial customers
self-insure their risks or utilize large deductibles on purchased
insurance. there are approximately
3,400 property and liability insurance companies in the united states operating
independently or in groups, and no single company or group is dominant. according to a.m.best, we are the
fourth-largest united states
commercial lines property
and liability insurance group based on 2001 direct premiums written. some of our competitors are larger and have
greater access to capital. in various
markets, we also compete based on ratings and several of our competitors are
higher rated.
in addition, the
financial services industry in general continues to be affected by an
intensifying competitive environment, as demonstrated by consolidation through
mergers and acquisitions and competition from new entrants, as well as
established competitors using new technologies, including the internet, to
establish or expand their businesses.
the gramm-leach-bliley act, passed in 1999, which repealed u.s. laws
that separated commercial banking, investment banking and insurance activities,
together with changes to the industry resulting from previous reforms, has
increased the number of companies competing for a similar customer base.
our competitors in the
specialty commercial and commercial lines segments include american
international group, the chubb corporation, cna financial corporation, hartford
insurance group, safeco corporation and travelers property casualty corp.
our competitors in the
surety & construction segment include cna surety corporation, american
international group, travelers property casualty corp., and zurich north
america. in our international and
lloyds segment, our international specialties compete with numerous insurers
in the united kingdom, canada and ireland while competitors in lloyds markets
in which we are active include various insurance companies and other members of
lloyds.
our subsidiaries compete
principally by attempting to offer a combination of superior products,
underwriting expertise and services at a competitive, yet profitable,
price. additionally, our relatively
large size and underwriting capacity provide us with opportunities not available
to smaller companies.
asset management
nuveen investments is
subject to substantial competition in all aspects of its business. the registered representatives that
distribute nuveen investments investment products also distribute numerous
competing products, often including products sponsored by the retail
distribution firms where they are employed.
there are relatively few barriers to entry for new investment management
firms. nuveen investments managed
account business is also subject to substantial competition from other
investment management firms seeking to be approved as managers in the various
wrap-fee programs. the sponsor firms
have a limited number of approved managers at the highest and most attractive
levels of their programs and closely monitor the investment performance of such
firms on an on-going basis as they evaluate which firms are eligible for
continued participation in these programs.
nuveen investments is also subject to competition in obtaining the
commitment of underwriters to underwrite its exchange traded fund
offerings. to the extent the increased
competition for underwriting and distribution causes high distribution costs,
nuveen investments net revenue and earnings will be reduced. investment products are sold to the public
by broker/dealers, banks, insurance companies and others, and many competing
investment product sponsors offer a broader array of investment products.
many of these
institutions have substantially greater resources than nuveen. in addition, continuing consolidation in the
financial services industry and the prolonged slump in equity market
performance are altering the landscape in which nuveen investments
distributors compete and the economics of many of the products they offer. the effect that these continuing changes in
the brokerage and investment management industries will have on nuveen
investments and its competitors cannot be predicted. nuveen investments competes with other providers of products
primarily on the basis of the range of products offered, the investment
performance of such products, quality of service, fees charged, the level and
type of broker compensation, the manner in which such products are marketed and
distributed, and the services provided to registered representatives and
investors.
regulation
property-liability insurance
insurance
holding company regulation. the st. paul
and our domestic insurance subsidiaries are subject to regulation as an
insurance holding company system in states where our insurance subsidiaries are
domiciled, which currently include minnesota, maryland, wisconsin, north
dakota, mississippi, iowa, illinois, california, delaware, indiana, vermont and
new york. such regulation generally
provides that transactions between companies within the holding company system
must be fair and equitable. transfers
of assets among such affiliated companies, certain dividend payments from
insurance subsidiaries and certain material transactions between companies
within the system may be subject to prior notice to, or prior approval by,
state regulatory authorities. such
regulations also require the insurance holding company and each insurance
subsidiary to register with the insurance department in the insurance
subsidiarys state of domicile and to furnish annually financial and other
information about the operations of companies within the holding company
system.
payment
of dividends. fire
and marine is our lead u.s. property-liability underwriting subsidiary, and its
dividend paying capacity is regulated by the laws of minnesota, its state of
domicile. minnesota insurance law
provides that, except in the case of extraordinary dividends or distributions,
all dividends or distributions paid by fire and marine may be declared or paid
only from earned surplus, or unassigned funds, as determined pursuant to
statutory accounting principles. as of
december 31, 2002, fire and marines earned surplus was $2.0 billion. fire and marine also must notify the minnesota
insurance regulator of its intent to pay a dividend if the dividend, together
with other dividends or distributions made within the preceding twelve months,
would exceed a specified statutory limit, and may not pay such dividend until
either 30 days after the minnesota insurance regulator has received notice of
it and has not within that period disapproved it, or the regulator has approved
the payment. the current statutory
limitation applicable to minnesota property-liability insurers generally is the
greater of:
(1) 10%
of such insurers surplus as regards policyholders as of the december 31 next
preceding the date of the proposed dividend or distribution; or
(2) the
net income of such insurer, not including realized investment gains, for the 12-month
period ending the december 31 next preceding the date of the proposed dividend
or distribution,
in each case determined
under statutory accounting principles.
statutory accounting principles differ from gaap primarily in relation
to deferred policy acquisition costs, deferred taxes and certain other assets,
and reserve calculation assumptions. the minnesota insurance regulator is also
required to review at least annually the dividends paid by a minnesota domestic
insurer to determine if the dividends are reasonable based upon (1) the
adequacy of surplus as regards policyholders remaining after the dividend
payments and (2) the quality of the insurers earnings and extent to which the
required earnings include extraordinary items.
other states and foreign
jurisdictions have similar regulations to those of minnesota that affect the
ability of our other insurance subsidiaries, most of which are subsidiaries of
fire and marine, to pay dividends. the
laws regulating dividends of the other states and foreign jurisdictions where
our other insurance subsidiaries are domiciled are similar, but not identical,
to minnesotas, and may be more restrictive.
in addition, many of our insurance subsidiaries are held by other
insurance subsidiaries, and only indirectly by us. therefore, the ability of these indirectly-held subsidiaries to
pay dividends to their direct parents, and our ability to receive these
dividends from those intermediate subsidiaries, will be subject to the
respective ability of all such subsidiaries to meet financial and regulatory
requirements applicable to them.
during 2002, we received
no cash dividends from our u.s. insurance subsidiaries. although $505 million
will be available for dividends in 2003 without prior regulatory approval, business
and regulatory considerations may impact the amount of dividends actually paid.
change
of control. most
states, including the states in which our domestic insurance subsidiaries are
domiciled, have insurance laws that require regulatory approval of a change of
control of an insurer or an insurers holding company. laws such as these that apply to us prevent
any person from acquiring control of the st. paul or of our insurance
subsidiaries unless that person has filed a statement with specified
information with the insurance regulators and has obtained their prior
approval. under most states statutes,
acquiring 10% or more of the voting stock of an insurance company or its parent
company is presumptively considered a change of control, although such
presumption may be rebutted.
accordingly, any person who acquires 10% or more of the voting
securities of the st. paul without the prior approval of the insurance
regulators of the states in which our insurance subsidiaries are domiciled will
be in violation of these states laws and may be subject to injunctive action
requiring the disposition or seizure of those securities by the relevant
insurance regulator or prohibiting the voting of those securities and to other
actions determined by the relevant insurance regulator.
in addition, many state
insurance laws require prior notification of state insurance departments of a
change in control of a non-domiciliary insurance company doing business in that
state. while these pre-notification
statutes do not authorize the state insurance departments to disapprove the
change in control, they authorize regulatory action in the affected state if
particular conditions exist such as undue market concentration. any future transactions that would
constitute a change in control of the st. paul may require prior notification
in those states that have adopted pre-acquisition notification laws.
change of control laws
may discourage potential acquisition proposals and may delay, deter or prevent
a change of control of the st. paul, including through transactions, and in
particular unsolicited transactions, that some or all of our shareholders might
consider to be desirable.
state
regulation of insurance operations. our insurance
subsidiaries are subject to licensing and supervision by government regulatory
agencies in the jurisdictions in which they do business. the nature and extent of such regulation
vary but generally have their source in statutes that delegate regulatory,
supervisory and administrative powers to insurance regulators, which in the
u.s. are state authorities. such
regulation, supervision and administration of the insurance subsidiaries may
relate, among other things, to the standards of solvency which must be met and
maintained; the licensing of insurers and their agents; the nature of and
limitations on investments; restrictions on the size of risk which may be
insured under a single policy; deposits of securities for the benefit of
policyholders; regulation of policy forms and premium rates; periodic
examination of the affairs of insurance companies; annual and other reports
required to be filed on the financial condition of insurers or for other
purposes; requirements regarding reserves for unearned premiums, losses and
other matters; the nature of and limitations on dividends to policyholders and
shareholders; the nature and extent of required participation in insurance
guaranty funds; and the involuntary assumption of hard-to-place or high-risk insurance
business, primarily in workers compensation insurance lines.
loss ratio trends in
property-liability insurance underwriting experience may be improved by, among
other things, changing the kinds of coverages provided by policies, providing
loss prevention and risk management services, increasing premium rates,
purchasing reinsurance or by a combination of these factors. the ability of our
insurance subsidiaries to meet emerging adverse underwriting trends may be
delayed, from time to time, by the effects of laws which require prior approval
by insurance regulatory authorities of changes in policy forms and premium
rates. our u.s. underwriting operations do business in all 50 states and the
district of columbia, puerto rico, guam and the u.s. virgin islands. a number
of these jurisdictions require prior approval of most or all premium rates.
risk-based
capital requirements. in
order to enhance the regulation of insurer solvency, the national association
of insurance commissioners (the naic) has adopted a formula and model law to
implement risk-based capital (rbc) requirements for most property and
casualty insurance companies, which is designed to determine minimum capital
requirements and to raise the level of protection that statutory surplus provides
for policyholder obligations. the rbc
formula for property and casualty insurance companies measures three major
areas of risk facing property and casualty insurers: underwriting, which
encompasses the risk of adverse loss developments and inadequate pricing;
declines in asset values arising from market and/or credit risk; and
off-balance sheet risk arising from adverse experience from non-controlled
assets, guarantees for affiliates or other contingent liabilities and excessive
premium growth.
under laws adopted by
individual states, insurers having less total adjusted capital than that
required by the rbc calculation will be subject to varying degrees of
regulatory action, depending on the level of capital inadequacy. the rbc ratios for each of our insurance
subsidiaries currently are above the ranges that would require any regulatory
or corrective action.
iris tests.
the naic has developed a set of financial relationships or tests known
as the insurance regulatory information system to assist state regulators in
monitoring the financial condition of insurance companies and identifying
companies that require special attention or action by insurance regulatory
authorities. insurance companies generally
submit data annually to the naic, which in turn analyzes the data using
prescribed financial data ratios, each with defined usual ranges. generally, regulators will begin to
investigate or monitor an insurance company if its ratios fall outside the
usual ranges for four or more of the ratios.
if an insurance company has insufficient capital, regulators may act to
reduce the amount of insurance it can issue.
we are not aware that any of our insurance companies are currently
subject to regulatory scrutiny based on these ratios.
insurance reserves. state and provincial insurance
laws require us to analyze the adequacy of our reserves annually. our actuaries
must submit an opinion that our reserves, when considered in light of the
assets we hold with respect to those reserves, make adequate provision for our
contractual obligations and related expenses.
shared market and similar arrangements. state insurance laws and
regulations require us to participate in mandatory property-liability shared
market, pooling or similar arrangements that provide insurance coverage to
individuals or others who otherwise are unable to purchase coverage voluntarily
provided by private insurers. shared
market mechanisms include assigned risk plans; fair access to insurance
requirement or fair plans; and reinsurance facilities for covering
catastrophic risk. in addition, some
states require insurers to participate in reinsurance pools for claims that
exceed specified amounts. our
participation in these mandatory shared market or pooling mechanisms generally
is related to the amounts of our direct writings for the type of coverage
written by the specific arrangement in the applicable state. we cannot predict the financial impact of
our participation in these arrangements.
insurance guaranty association assessments.
each state has insurance guaranty association laws under which life and
property and casualty insurers doing business in the state may be assessed by
state insurance guaranty associations for certain obligations of insolvent
insurance companies to policyholders and claimants. typically, states assess each member insurer in an amount related
to the member insurers proportionate share of the business written by all
member insurers in the state. for the
years ended december 31, 2002 and 2001, we incurred net expense of $13 million
and $5 million, respectively, pursuant to state insurance guaranty association
laws. while we cannot predict the
amount and timing of any future assessments on our insurance companies under
these laws, we have established reserves that we believe are adequate for
assessments relating to insurance companies that are currently subject to
insolvency proceedings.
federal
regulation of insurance operations. on
november 26, 2002, president bush signed into law the terrorism risk insurance
act of 2002, or tria. a discussion of
trias principal provisions can be found in the terrorism risk and
legislation section of managements discussion and analysis included on pages
25 and 26 of our 2002 annual report to shareholders, which is incorporated
herein by reference.
our domestic insurance
subsidiaries are subject to tria, although tria does not apply to all of the
coverages they write. tria does apply
to most of our coverages written, including property, commercial multi-peril,
fire, ocean marine, inland marine, liability, commercial auto, aircraft, surety
and workers compensation.
international
regulation of insurance operations. our insurance underwriting operations in the
united kingdom are regulated by the financial services authority (fsa). the fsas principal objectives are to
maintain market confidence, promote public understanding of the financial
system, protect consumers, and to fight financial crime. in canada, the conduct of insurance business
is regulated under provisions of the insurance companies act of 1992, which
requires insurance companies to maintain certain levels of capital depending on
the type and amount of insurance policies in force. the lloyds operation is also regulated by the fsa, which has
delegated certain regulatory responsibilities to the council of lloyds. we are also subject to regulations in the
other countries and jurisdictions in which we underwrite insurance
business. the terms and conditions of
our plans to cease underwriting operations in selected foreign countries were
subject to regulatory approval in several of those countries.
asset management
one of nuveen
investments subsidiaries is registered as a broker/dealer under the securities
exchange act of 1934 and is subject to regulation by the securities and
exchange commission (the commission), nasd regulation, inc. and other federal
and state agencies and self-regulatory organizations. the securities industry is one of the most highly regulated in
the united states, and failure to comply with related laws and regulations can
result in the revocation of broker/dealer licenses, the imposition of censures
or fines, and the suspension or expulsion of a firm and/or its employees from
the securities business.
each of nuveen
investments investment adviser subsidiaries is registered with the commission
under the investment advisers act.
virtually all aspects of nuveen investments investment management
business are subject to various federal and state laws and regulations. these laws and regulations are primarily
intended to benefit the investment product holder and generally grant supervisory
agencies and bodies broad administrative powers, including the power to limit
or restrict nuveen from carrying on its investment management business in the
event that it fails to comply with such laws and regulations. in such event, the possible sanctions that
may be imposed include the suspension of individual employees, limitations on
nuveen investments engaging in the investment management business for
specified periods of time, the revocation of its advisory subsidiaries
registrations as investment advisers or other censures and fines.
forward-looking statement disclosure and certain risks
this
report contains certain forward-looking statements within the meaning of the
private litigation reform act of 1995.
forward-looking statements are statements other than historical
information or statements of current condition. words such as expects, anticipates, intends, plans,
believes, seeks or estimates, or variations of such words, and similar
expressions are intended to identify forward-looking statements. examples of these forward-looking statements
include statements concerning:
market
and other conditions and their effect on future premiums, revenues, earnings,
cash flow and investment income;
price
increases, improved loss experience, and expense savings resulting from the
restructuring and other actions and initiatives announced in recent years;
statements
concerning the anticipated approval of the western macarthur asbestos
litigation settlement; and
statements
concerning our expectations of savings in our health care segment as we settle
claims in a runoff environment.
in light of the risks and
uncertainties inherent in future projections, many of which are beyond our
control, actual results could differ materially from those in forward-looking
statements. these statements should not
be regarded as a representation that anticipated events will occur or that
expected objectives will be achieved.
risks and uncertainties include, but are not limited to, the following:
changes
in the demand for, pricing of, or supply of our products;
our
ability to effectively implement price increases;
general
economic conditions, including changes in interest rates and the performance of
financial markets;
additional
statement of operations charges if our loss reserves are insufficient;
our
exposure to natural or man-made catastrophic events, which are unpredictable,
with a frequency or severity exceeding our estimates, resulting in material
losses;
the
possibility that claims cost trends that we anticipate in our health care and
other businesses may not develop as we expect;
the
impact of the september 11, 2001 terrorist attack and the ensuing global war on
terrorism on the insurance and reinsurance industry in general, the
implementation of the terrorism risk insurance act and potential further
intervention in the insurance and reinsurance markets to make available
insurance coverage for acts of terrorism;
risks
relating to our potential exposure to losses arising from acts of terrorism and
our ability to obtain reinsurance covering such exposures;
risks
relating to our continuing ability to obtain reinsurance covering catastrophe,
surety and other exposures at appropriate prices and/or in sufficient amounts;
risks
relating to the collectibility of reinsurance and adequacy of reinsurance to
protect us against losses;
risks
and uncertainties relating to international political developments, including
the possibility of warfare, and their potential effect on economic conditions;
changes
in domestic and foreign laws, tax laws and changes in the regulation of our
businesses which affect our profitability and our growth;
the
possibility of downgrades in our ratings significantly adversely affecting us,
including, but not limited to, reducing the number of insurance policies we
write, generally, or causing clients who require an insurer with a certain
rating level to use higher-rated insurers or causing us to borrow at higher
interest rates;
the
risk that our investment portfolio suffers reduced returns or investment losses
which could reduce our profitability;
the
effect of financial market and interest rate conditions on pension plan
assumptions and contribution levels;
the
impact of assessments and other surcharges for guaranty funds and second-injury
funds and other mandatory pooling arrangements;
risks
related to the business underwritten on our policy forms on behalf of platinum
underwriters holdings, ltd. (platinum) and fully reinsured to platinum
pursuant to the quota share reinsurance agreements entered into in connection
with the transfer of our ongoing reinsurance operations to platinum in 2002;
loss
of significant customers;
risks
relating to the decision of the bankruptcy court with respect to the approval
of the settlement of the western macarthur matter;
changes
in our estimate of insurance industry losses resulting from the september 11,
2001 terrorist attack (including the impact if that attack were deemed two
insurable events rather than one);
adverse
developments in non-western macarthur related asbestos litigation (including
claims that certain asbestos-related insurance policies are not subject to
aggregate limits);
adverse
developments in environmental litigation involving policy coverage and
liability issues;
the
effects of emerging claim and coverage issues on our business, such as
developments relating to issues such as mold conditions, construction defects
and changes in interpretation of the named insured provision with respect to
the uninsured/underinsured motorist coverage in commercial automobile policies;
the
growing trend of plaintiffs targeting property-liability insurers, including
us, in purported class action litigation relating to claim-handling and other
practices;
the
inability of our subsidiaries to pay dividends to us in sufficient amounts to
enable us to meet our obligations and pay future dividends;
the
cyclicality of the property-liability insurance industry causing fluctuations
in our results;
risks
relating to our asset management business, including the risk of material
reductions to assets under management if we experience poor investment
performance;
our
dependence on the business provided to us by agents and brokers;
our
implementation of new strategies, including our intention to withdraw from
certain lines of business, as a result of the strategic review completed in
late 2001;
and
various other matters.
item 2. properties.
fire and marine owns our corporate headquarters
buildings, located at 385 washington street and 130 west sixth street, st.
paul, mn. these buildings are adjacent
to one another and consist of approximately 1.1 million square feet of gross
floor space. fire and marine also owns
property in woodbury, mn where its administrative services building and
off-site computer processing operations are located. fire and marine also owns the former usf&g headquarters
campus known as mount washington center, located in baltimore, md. the campus currently houses offices for
certain executives of the st. paul, as well as offices for certain
underwriting, legal and claim personnel.
a training and development center also resides on the mount washington
campus. fire and marine has leased a
substantial portion of one of the buildings on the campus to an outside
party. at the end of january 2003, we
signed a nonbinding letter of intent to sell the entire mount washington center
campus. in the event that potential
sale occurs, we expect to lease back a portion of the property until september
30, 2004.
we own a building in
london, england, which houses a portion of our u.k. operations. we retained ownership of another building in
london subsequent to the sale of minet holdings plc to aon corporation in 1997,
which is being leased to an outside party.
in a transaction completed in march 2001, we sold a 50% interest in this
building.
fire and marine and its
subsidiary, st. paul properties, inc., own a portfolio of income-producing
properties in various locations across the united states that they have
purchased for investment. included in
this portfolio are four office buildings in which we hold a 50% ownership
interest located on manhattan island in new york, ny which collectively
accounted for approximately 7% of the carrying value of the property portfolio
at december 31, 2002.
our operating
subsidiaries rent or lease office space in most cities in which they operate.
management considers the
currently owned and leased office facilities of the st. paul and its
subsidiaries adequate for the current and anticipated future level of
operations.
item 3. legal proceedings.
the information set forth
in the legal matters section of note 17 to our consolidated financial
statements, and the asbestos settlement agreement and environmental and
asbestos claims sections of managements discussion and analysis, which are
all included in our 2002 annual report to shareholders, are incorporated herein
by reference.
in 1990, at the direction
of the uk department of trade and industry (dti), five insurance underwriting
subsidiaries of london united investments plc (lui) suspended underwriting new
insurance business. at the same time,
four of those subsidiaries, being insolvent, suspended payment of claims and
have since been placed in provisional liquidation. the fifth subsidiary, walbrook insurance company, continued
paying claims until may of 1992 when it was also placed in provisional
insolvent liquidation. weavers
underwriting agency (weavers), an lui subsidiary, managed these insurers. minet, a former insurance brokerage
subsidiary of ours, had brokered business to and from weavers for many
years. from 1973 through 1980, our
uk-based underwriting operations, now called st. paul international insurance
company ltd. (spi), had accepted business from weavers. a portion of that business was ceded by spi
to reinsurers. certain of those
reinsurers have challenged the validity of certain reinsurance contracts (or
the amount of recovery thereunder) relating to the weavers pool, of which spi
was a member, in an attempt to avoid liability under those contracts. spi and other members of the weavers pool
are seeking enforcement of the reinsurance contracts. minet may also become the subject of legal proceedings arising
from its role as one of the major brokers for weavers. when we sold minet in may 1997, we agreed to
indemnify the purchaser for most of minets then existing liabilities,
including liabilities relating to the weavers matter. we will vigorously
contest any proceedings relating to the weavers matter. we recognize that the final outcome of these
proceedings, if adverse to us, may materially impact the results of operations
in the period in which that outcome occurs.
we believe that such an adverse outcome, however, will not have a
materially adverse effect on our liquidity or overall financial position.
item 4. submission of matters to a vote of
security holders.
no matter was submitted
to a vote of security holders during the quarter ended december 31, 2002.
executive officers of the st. paul
all of the following
persons are regarded as executive officers of the st. paul companies, inc.
because of their responsibilities and duties as elected officers of the st.
paul or fire and marine. there are no
family relationships between any of our executive officers and directors, and
there are no arrangements or understandings between any of these officers and
any other person pursuant to which the officer was selected as an officer. the officers listed in the chart below,
except jay s. fishman, thomas a. bradley, william h. heyman, andy f. bessette,
john a. maccoll, timothy m. yessman, marita zuraitis and samuel g. liss have
held positions with the st. paul or one or more of its subsidiaries for more
than five years, and have been employees of the st. paul or a subsidiary for
more than five years.
jay s. fishman joined the
st. paul in october 2001. prior to that
date, mr. fishman was employed as chairman, president and chief executive
officer of the travelers insurance group and as chief operating officer-finance
and risk of citigroup, inc. mr. fishman
held various executive positions with citigroup and its predecessor since 1989
and with travelers since 1993. william
h. heyman joined the st. paul in april 2002.
for more than five years prior to that date, mr. heyman was employed by
citigroup, inc., most recently in the position of chairman of citigroup
investments. andy f. bessette joined
the st. paul in january 2002. for more
than five years prior to that date, mr. bessette held various positions in
corporate real estate and corporate services at travelers insurance company,
including the position of vice president since 1999. timothy m. yessman joined the st. paul in november 2001. for more than five years prior to that date,
mr. yessman was employed in various capacities at travelers property casualty
company, including most recently in the position of senior vice president of
travelers specialty liability group.
samuel g. liss joined the st. paul in february 2003. mr. liss was most recently employed as an
independent financial consultant. for
the period 1994 to 2001, mr. liss was employed as a managing director at credit
suisse first boston.
messrs. thomas a. bradley
and john a. maccoll, and ms. marita zuraitis, held positions and were employees
of usf&g corporation or one of its subsidiaries for five or more years
prior to its merger with the st. paul in april of 1998.
name
age
positions
presently held
term of
office and period of
service
jay s. fishman
chairman, chief
executive
officer and president
(the st. paul companies, inc.)
serving at the pleasure
of the
board from october 2001.
thomas a. bradley
executive vice
president and
chief financial officer
(the st. paul companies, inc.)
serving at the pleasure
of the
board from july 2002.
william h. heyman
executive vice
president and
chief investment officer
(the st. paul companies, inc.)
serving at the pleasure
of the
board from april 2002.
john a. maccoll
vice chairman and
general
counsel
(the st. paul companies, inc.)
serving at the pleasure
of the
board from may 2002.
andy f. bessette
executive vice
president and
chief administrative officer
(the st. paul companies, inc.)
serving at the pleasure
of the
board from july 2002.
name
age
positions
presently held
term of
office and period of
service
timothy m. yessman
executive vice
president, claim
(fire and marine)
serving at the pleasure
of the
board from november 2001.
marita zuraitis
executive vice
president
commercial lines
(fire and marine)
serving at the pleasure
of the
board from july 2001.
t. michael miller
executive vice
president
specialty commercial
(fire and marine)
serving at the pleasure
of the
board from july 2001.
kent d. urness
executive vice
president
international insurance
operations
(fire and marine)
serving at the pleasure
of the
board from july 2001.
samuel g. liss
executive vice
president
business development
(the st. paul companies, inc.)
serving at the pleasure
of the
board from february 2003.
bruce a. backberg
senior vice president
and
corporate secretary
(the st. paul companies, inc.)
serving at the pleasure
of the
board from november 1997.
john p. clifford
senior vice president
human
resources
(the st. paul companies, inc.)
serving at the pleasure
of the
board from march 2002.
john c. treacy
vice president and
corporate
controller
(the st. paul companies, inc.)
serving at the pleasure
of the
board from march 2001.
laura c. gagnon
vice president
finance and
investor relations
(the st. paul companies, inc.)
serving at the pleasure
of the
board from july 1999.
part ii
item 5. market for the registrants common
equity and
related
stockholder matters.
our common stock is
traded on the new york stock exchange, where it is assigned the symbol
spc. the number of holders of record,
including individual owners, of our common stock was 18,021 as of march 14,
2003. the following table sets forth
the amount of cash dividends declared per share and the high and low closing
sales prices of our common stock for each quarter during the last two years.
high
low
cash
dividend
declared
first
quarter
$
49.41
$
39.50
$
0.29
second
quarter
50.12
38.34
0.29
third
quarter
37.88
24.20
0.29
fourth
quarter
37.24
27.05
0.29
first
quarter
$
51.38
$
40.25
$
0.28
second
quarter
52.12
41.53
0.28
third
quarter
50.79
35.50
0.28
fourth
quarter
51.50
40.30
0.28
cash dividends paid per
share in 2002 and 2001 were $1.15 and $1.11, respectively.
equity
compensation plan information
the following table
presents information related to securities to be issued upon the exercise of
outstanding options, warrants and rights pursuant to equity compensation plans
that have been approved by shareholders, as well as plans that have not been approved by shareholders,
as of december 31, 2002.
(a)
(b)
(c)
plan category
number of securities to
be issued upon exercise of
outstanding options,
warrants and rights
weighted
average
exercise price of
outstanding
options, warrants
and rights
number of
securities
remaining available for
future issuance under
equity compensation
plans (excluding
securities in column (a))
equity
compensation plans approved by security holders
17,216,477
$
39.87
12,121,240
(1)
equity
compensation plans not approved by security holders
(2)
960,971
$
38.40
total
18,177,448
$
39.79
12,121,240
(1) of the 12,121,240 shares remaining available
at december 31, 2002, up to 5,518,054 could be issued as restricted stock.
(2) the st. paul international 1988 stock option
plan and the st. paul holdings 1996 stock option plan were established to grant
options to certain eligible employees of our u.k. operations. the options granted under these plans were
priced at the market price of our common stock on the date of grant and were
eligible for exercise at any time from three to ten years after the date of
grant.
in april 1998, the st.
paul merged with usf&g corporation (usf&g), and the outstanding
options on usf&g stock were converted into options on the st. pauls
stock. at december 31, 2002, 843,555
stock options were outstanding pursuant to that conversion, of which 655,131
(with a weighted average exercise price of $38.61) related to plans approved by
usf&g shareholders prior to the merger, and 188,424 (with a weighted
average exercise price of $26.35) related to plans that had not been approved
by usf&g shareholders prior to the merger.
these options are not included in the preceding table.
item 6 selected financial data.
the six-year summary of
selected financial data included on page 57 of the st. pauls 2002 annual
report to shareholders is incorporated herein by reference.
item 7. managements discussion and analysis
of financial condition and results of operations.
the managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations on
pages 23 through 56 of the st. pauls 2002 annual report to shareholders is
incorporated herein by reference.
item 7a. quantitative and qualitative
disclosures about market risk.
the exposures to market
risk section of managements discussion and analysis on pages 54 and 55 of the
st. pauls 2002 annual report to shareholders is incorporated herein by
reference.
item 8. financial statements and
supplementary data.
the independent
auditors report, managements responsibility for financial statements,
consolidated balance sheets, consolidated statements of operations,
comprehensive income, shareholders equity and cash flows, and notes to
consolidated financial statements included on pages 58 through 91 of the st.
pauls 2002 annual report to shareholders are incorporated herein by reference.
item 9. changes in and disagreements with
accountants on accounting and financial disclosure.
none.
part iii
item 10. directors and executive officers of
the registrant.
the election of
directors - nominees for directors section, which provides information
regarding our directors, on pages 4 to 6 of the proxy statement relating to the
annual meeting of shareholders to be held may 6, 2003, is incorporated herein
by reference. pierson m. grieve, 75,
sir david g. john, 64, and bruce k. maclaury, 71, are currently directors of
the st. paul, but are not standing for re-election at the 2003 annual meeting
of shareholders.
the section 16(a)
beneficial ownership reporting compliance section on page 25 of the proxy
statement relating to the annual meeting of shareholders to be held may 6,
2003, is incorporated herein by reference.
item 11. executive compensation.
the executive
compensation section on pages 13 to 21 and the election of directors - board
of directors compensation section on pages 6 to 8 of the proxy statement
relating to the annual meeting of shareholders to be held may 6, 2003, are
incorporated herein by reference.
item 12. security ownership of certain
beneficial owners and management and related stockholder matters.
the security ownership
of certain beneficial owners and management section on pages 23 to 25 of the
proxy statement relating to the annual meeting of shareholders to be held may
6, 2003, is incorporated herein by reference.
item 13. certain relationships and related
transactions.
the indebtedness of
management section on page 22 of the proxy statement relating to the annual
meeting of shareholders to be held may 6, 2003, is incorporated herein by
reference.
item 14. controls and procedures.
the st. paul has
established and maintains disclosure controls and procedures (as those terms
are defined in rules 13a-14(c) and 15d-14(c) under the securities exchange act
of 1934 (exchange act). jay s.
fishman, chairman and chief executive officer of the st. paul, and thomas a.
bradley, executive vice president and chief financial officer of the st. paul,
have evaluated our disclosure controls and procedures within 90 days of the
filing of this form 10-k. based on
their evaluations, messrs. fishman and bradley have concluded that our
disclosure controls and procedures are effective to ensure that the information
required to be disclosed by us in reports that we file or submit under the
exchange act is recorded, processed, summarized and reported within the time
periods specified by sec rules and forms.
there were no significant
changes in our internal controls or in other factors that could significantly
affect these controls after the date of their evaluations. there were no deficiencies or material
weaknesses, and therefore there were no corrective actions taken.
part iv
item 15. exhibits, financial statements,
financial statement
schedules
and reports on form 8-k.
(a) filed documents. the following documents are filed as part of this report:
1.
financial statements.
incorporated by
reference into part ii of this report:
the st. paul companies,
inc. and subsidiaries:
consolidated statements
of operations - years ended december31, 2002, 2001 and 2000
consolidated
statements of comprehensive income - years ended december 31, 2002, 2001 and
consolidated balance sheets
- december31, 2002 and 2001
consolidated
statements of shareholders equity - years ended december 31, 2002, 2001 and
consolidated statements
of cash flows - years ended december 31, 2002, 2001 and 2000
notes to consolidated
financial statements
independent auditors
report
the
foregoing documents are included in the st. pauls 2002 annual report to
shareholders and are incorporated herein by reference.
2.
financial statement schedules.
the st. paul
companies, inc. and subsidiaries:
independent
auditors report on financial statement schedules
i.
summary of
investments - other than investments in related parties
ii.
condensed
financial information of registrant
iii.
supplementary
insurance information
iv.
reinsurance
v.
valuation
and qualifying accounts
all
other schedules are omitted because they are not applicable, not required, or
the information is
included elsewhere in the consolidated financial statements or notes thereto.
3.
exhibits. an exhibit index is set forth at page 52
of this report.
exhibit no.
(2)
the formation and
separation agreement between the st. paul and platinum underwriters holdings,
ltd., dated as of october 28, 2002, is incorporated by reference to exhibit 2
of platinum underwriters holdings, ltd.'s october 23, 2002 amendment to its
registration statement on form s-1 (file no. 333-86906).
(3)
(a)
the current articles of
incorporation of the st. paul are incorporated by reference to exhibit 3(a)
of the form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 1998.
(b)
the current bylaws of
the st. paul are incorporated by reference to exhibit 3(b) of the form 10-k
for the year ended december 31, 2000.
(4)
(a)
a specimen certificate
of the st. pauls common stock is incorporated by reference to exhibit 4(a)
of the form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 1998.
there are no long-term
debt instruments in which the total amount of securities authorized exceeds
10% of the total assets of the st. paul and its subsidiaries on a
consolidated basis. the st. paul
agrees to furnish a copy of any of its long-term debt instruments to the
securities and exchange commission upon request.
(10)
(a)
the senior executive
performance plan is incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(a) of the form
10-k for the year ended december 31, 2001.
(b)
the employment
agreement dated october 10, 2001 between the st. paul and mr. jay s. fishman
is incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(b) of the form 10-q for the
quarter ended september 30, 2001.
(c)
the employment
agreement dated november 5, 2001 between the st. paul and timothy m. yessman
is filed herewith.
(d)
the retention incentive
agreement dated may 20, 2002 between the st. paul and john a. maccoll is
incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(a) of the form 10-q for the quarter
ended june 30, 2002.
(e)
the deferred stock plan
for non-employee directors is incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(a) of
the form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 2000.
(f)
the amended and
restated senior executive severance policy is incorporated by reference to
exhibit 10(e) of the form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 2001.
(g)
the amended and
restated 1994 stock incentive plan is incorporated by reference to exhibit
10(f) of the form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 2001.
(h)
the directors
charitable award program, as amended, is incorporated by reference to exhibit
10(d) of the form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 2000.
(i)
the amended and
restated special severance policy is incorporated by reference to exhibit
10(e) of the form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 1998.
(j)
the amendment to the
amended and restated special severance policy is incorporated by reference to
exhibit 10(e) of the form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 2000.
(k)
the 1988 stock option
plan as in effect for options granted prior to june 1994, as amended, is
incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(c) of the form 10-k for the year
ended december 31, 1998.
(l)
the non-employee
director stock retainer plan is incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(d) of
the form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 1998.
(m)
the annual incentive
plan is incorporated by reference to the proxy statement relating to the 1999
annual meeting of shareholders that was held on may 4, 1999.
(n)
the deferred management
incentive awards plan is incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(a) of the
form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 1997.
(o)
the directors deferred
compensation plan is incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(b) of the form
10-k for the year ended december 31, 1997.
(p)
the benefit
equalization plan - 1995 revision is incorporated by reference to exhibit
10(e) of the form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 1997.
(q)
first amendment to
benefit equalization plan - 1995 revision is incorporated by reference to
exhibit 10(f) of the form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 1997.
(r)
executive
post-retirement life insurance plan - summary plan description is
incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(g) of the form 10-k for the year
ended december 31, 1997.
(s)
executive long-term
disability plan - summary plan description is incorporated by reference to
exhibit 10(h) of the form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 1997.
(t)
the st. paul re
long-term incentive plan is incorporated by reference to the form s-8
registration statement filed march 17, 1998 (commission file no. 333-48121).
(u)
the special leveraged
stock purchase plan is incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(c) of the form
10-q for the quarter ended march 31, 1997.
(11)
a statement regarding
the computation of per share earnings is filed herewith.
(12)
a statement regarding
the computation of the ratio of earnings to fixed charges and the ratio of
earnings to combined fixed charges and preferred stock dividends is filed
herewith.
(13)
the st. pauls 2002
annual report to shareholders is furnished to the commission in paper format
pursuant to rule 14a-3(c). the
following portions of such annual report, representing those portions
expressly incorporated by reference in this report on form 10-k, are filed as an exhibit to this
report:
portions of annual report for the
year ended
december31, 2001
location
of
information
incorporated by
reference
consolidated
financial statements
item 8
notes
to consolidated financial statements
item 1, 8
independent
auditors report
item 8
managements
discussion and analysis
item 1, 3, 7
six-year
summary of selected financial data
item 6
(21)
list of subsidiaries of
the st. paul companies, inc. is filed herewith.
(23)
consent of independent
auditors to incorporation by reference of certain reports into registration
statements on form s-8 (sec file no.33-15392, no.33-23446,
no.33-23948, no.33-24220, no.33-24575, no.33-26923,
no.33-49273, no.33-56987, no. 333-01065, no. 333-22329, no.
333-25203, no. 333-28915, no. 333-48121, no. 333-50941, no. 333-50943, no.
333-67983, no. 333-63114, no. 333-63118, no. 333-65726 and no. 333-65728) and
form s-3 (sec fileno. 333-92466, no. 333-92466-01, no. 333-98525 and
no. 333-98525-01) is filed herewith.
(24)
power of attorney is
filed herewith.
(b)
reports on form 8-k.
(1)
a form 8-k current
report dated november 4, 2002 was filed related to announcement of the st.
pauls completion of the transfer of its continuing reinsurance business to
platinum underwriters holdings, ltd.
(2)
a form 8-k current
report dated january 27, 2003 was filed related to the announcement of the
st. pauls consolidated financial results for the year ended december 31,
2002.
(3)
a form 8-k current
report dated march 5, 2003 was filed containing the following documents for
the st. paul for the year ended december 31, 2002: managements discussion
and analysis of financial condition and results of operations; six-year
summary of selected financial data; statement regarding managements
responsibility for financial statements; independent auditors report;
consolidated financial statements; notes to consolidated financial
statements; and consent of independent auditors.
pursuant
to the requirements of section 13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of
1934, the st. paul companies, inc. has duly caused this report to be signed on
its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.
the st. paul
companies, inc.
(registrant)
date:
march 20, 2003
by
bruce a. backberg
bruce a. backberg
senior vice president
and corporate secretary
pursuant to the requirements
of the securities exchange act of 1934, this report has been signed below by
the following persons on behalf of the st. paul companies, inc. and in the
capacities and on the dates indicated.
date:
march 20, 2003
by
jay s. fishman
jay s. fishman,
director, chairman of the board,
chief executive officer and president
date:
march 20, 2003
by
thomas a. bradley
thomas a. bradley,
executive vice president
and chief financial officer
date:
march 20, 2003
by
john c. treacy
john c. treacy, vice
president and corporate
controller (principal accounting officer)
date:
march 20, 2003
by
carolyn h. byrd
carolyn h. byrd*,
director
date:
march 20, 2003
by
john h. dasburg
john h. dasburg*,
director
date:
march 20, 2003
by
janet m. dolan
janet m. dolan*,
director
date:
march 20, 2003
by
kenneth m. duberstein
kenneth m. duberstein*,
director
date:
march 20, 2003
by
lawrence g. graev
lawrence g. graev*,
director
date:
march 20, 2003
by
pierson m. grieve
pierson m. grieve*,
director
date:
march 20, 2003
by
thomas r. hodgson
thomas r. hodgson*,
director
date:
march 20, 2003
by
david g. john
david g. john*,
director
date:
march 20, 2003
by
william h. kling
william h. kling*,
director
date:
march 20, 2003
by
john a. maccoll
john a. maccoll*,
director, vice chairman
and general counsel
date:
march 20, 2003
by
bruce k. maclaury
bruce k. maclaury*,
director
date:
march 20, 2003
by
glen d. nelson, m.d.
glen d. nelson, m.d.*,
director
date:
march 20, 2003
by
gordon m. sprenger
gordon m. sprenger*,
director
date:
march 20, 2003
*by
bruce a. backberg
bruce a. backberg,
attorney-in-fact
certification
i, jay s. fishman,
chairman and chief executive officer, certify that:
1. i have reviewed
this annual report on form 10-k of the st. paul companies, inc.;
2. based on my
knowledge, this annual report does not contain any untrue statement of a
material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary to make the statements
made, in light of the circumstances under which such statements were made, not
misleading with respect to the period covered by this annual report.
3. based on my
knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial information included
in this annual report, fairly present in all material respects the financial
condition, results of operations and cash flows of the registrant as of, and
for, the periods presented in this annual report.
4. the registrants
other certifying officer and i are responsible for establishing and maintaining
disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in exchange act rules 13a-14 and
15d-14) for the registrant and we have:
a)
designed such disclosure controls and procedures to ensure that material
information related to the registrant, including its consolidated subsidiaries,
is made known to us by others within those entities, particularly during the
period in which this annual report is being prepared;
b)
evaluated the effectiveness of the registrants disclosure controls and
procedures as of a date within 90 days prior to the filing date of this annual
report (the evaluation date); and
c)
presented in this annual report our conclusions about the effectiveness of the
disclosure controls and procedures based on our evaluation as of the evaluation
date;
5. the registrants
other certifying officer and i have disclosed, based on our most recent
evaluation, to the registrants auditors and audit committee of registrants
board of directors (or persons performing the equivalent function):
a)
all significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal controls
which could adversely affect the registrants ability to record, process,
summarize and report financial data and have identified for the registrants
auditors any material weaknesses in internal controls; and
b)
any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other employees
who have a significant role in the registrants internal controls; and
6. the registrants
other certifying officer and i have indicated in this annual report whether or
not there were significant changes in internal controls or in other factors
that could significantly affect internal controls subsequent to the date of our
most recent evaluation, including any corrective actions with regard to
significant deficiencies and material weaknesses.
date:
march 20, 2003
by:
jay s. fishman
jay s. fishman
chairman, president and
chief executive officer
certification
i, thomas a. bradley,
chief financial officer, certify that:
1. i have reviewed
this annual report on form 10-k of the st. paul companies, inc.;
2. based on my
knowledge, this annual report does not contain any untrue statement of a
material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary to make the statements
made, in light of the circumstances under which such statements were made, not
misleading with respect to the period covered by this annual report.
3. based on my
knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial information included
in this annual report, fairly present in all material respects the financial
condition, results of operations and cash flows of the registrant as of, and
for, the periods presented in this annual report.
4. the registrants
other certifying officer and i are responsible for establishing and maintaining
disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in exchange act rules 13a-14 and
15d-14) for the registrant and we have:
a)
designed such disclosure controls and procedures to ensure that material
information related to the registrant, including its consolidated subsidiaries,
is made known to us by others within those entities, particularly during the
period in which this annual report is being prepared;
b)
evaluated the effectiveness of the registrants disclosure controls and
procedures as of a date within 90 days prior to the filing date of this annual
report (the evaluation date); and
c)
presented in this annual report our conclusions about the effectiveness of the
disclosure controls and procedures based on our evaluation as of the evaluation
date;
5. the registrants
other certifying officer and i have disclosed, based on our most recent
evaluation, to the registrants auditors and audit committee of registrants
board of directors (or persons performing the equivalent function):
a)
all significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal controls
which could adversely affect the registrants ability to record, process,
summarize and report financial data and have identified for the registrants
auditors any material weaknesses in internal controls; and
b)
any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other employees
who have a significant role in the registrants internal controls; and
6. the registrants
other certifying officer and i have indicated in this annual report whether or
not there were significant changes in internal controls or in other factors
that could significantly affect internal controls subsequent to the date of our
most recent evaluation, including any corrective actions with regard to
significant deficiencies and material weaknesses.
date:
march 20, 2003
by:
thomas a. bradley
thomas a. bradley
executive vice
president and
chief financial officer
independent auditors
report on financial statement schedules
the board of directors
and shareholders
the st. paul companies,
inc.:
under date of january 27,
2003, we reported on the consolidated balance sheets of the st. paul companies,
inc. and subsidiaries as of december 31, 2002 and 2001, and the related
consolidated statements of operations, shareholders equity, comprehensive
income and cash flows for each of the years in the three-year period ended
december 31, 2002, as contained in the 2002 annual report to shareholders. these consolidated financial statements and
our report thereon are incorporated by reference in the annual report on form
10-k for the year 2002. in connection
with our audits of the aforementioned consolidated financial statements we also
have audited the related financial statement schedules i through v, as listed
in the index in item 15(a)2 of said form 10-k.
these financial statement schedules are the responsibility of the
companys management. our
responsibility is to express an opinion on these financial statement schedules
based on our audits.
in our opinion, such
financial statement schedules i through v, when considered in relation to the
basic consolidated financial statements taken as a whole, present fairly, in
all material respects, the information set forth therein.
as discussed in the notes
to the consolidated financial statements, in 2001 the company adopted the
provisions of the statement of financial accounting standards no. 133,
accounting for derivative instruments and hedging activities and, as also
described in the notes to the consolidated financial statements, in 2002 the
company adopted the provisions of the statement of financial accounting
standards no. 141, business combinations and the statement of financial
accounting standards no. 142, goodwill and other intangible assets.
minneapolis, minnesota
kpmg llp
january 27, 2003
kpmg llp
the st. paul companies, inc. and subsidiaries
schedule i -
summary of investments
other than investments in related parties
december 31, 2002
(in millions)
cost*
value*
amount at
which shown
in the
balance sheet
type of investment:
fixed maturities:
united
states government and government agencies and authorities
$
1,054
$
1,125
$
1,125
states,
municipalities and political subdivisions
4,263
4,609
4,609
foreign
governments
1,779
1,848
1,848
corporate
securities
6,482
6,893
6,893
asset-backed
securities
mortgage-backed
securities
1,940
2,030
2,030
total
fixed maturities
16,178
17,188
17,188
equity
securities:
common
stocks:
public
utilities
banks,
trusts and insurance companies
industrial,
miscellaneous and all other
total
equity securities
venture
capital
real
estate and mortgage loans**
securities
lending collateral
other
investments
short-term
investments
2,152
2,152
total
investments
$
21,705
$
22,733
* see
notes 1, 8, 9 and 10 to the consolidated financial statements included in our
2002 annual report to shareholders.
** the cost
of real estate represents the cost of properties before valuation
provisions. (see schedule v on page
51).
the st. paul companies, inc. (parent only)
schedule ii -
condensed financial information of registrant
condensed balance sheet information
december 31, 2002 and 2001
(in millions)
assets:
investment
in subsidiaries
$
8,800
$
7,512
investments:
fixed
maturities
equity
securities
short-term
investments
other
investments
cash
deferred
income taxes
refundable
income taxes
intercompany
loans receivable
other
assets
total
assets
$
10,066
$
8,700
liabilities:
debt
$
3,866
$
2,989
income
taxes payable
dividends
payable to shareholders
other
liabilities
total
liabilities
4,320
3,586
shareholders
equity:
preferred:
convertible
preferred stock
guaranteed
obligation - psop
(40
)
(53
)
total
preferred shareholders equity
common:
common
stock, authorized 480 shares; issued 227 shares (208 in 2001)
2,606
2,192
retained
earnings
2,473
2,500
accumulated
other comprehensive income:
unrealized
appreciation of investments
unrealized
loss on foreign currency translation
(68
)
(76
)
unrealized
loss on derivatives
(1
)
(2
)
total
accumulated other comprehensive income
total
common shareholders equity
5,681
5,056
total
shareholders equity
5,746
5,114
total
liabilities and shareholders equity
$
10,066
$
8,700
see accompanying notes to
condensed financial information.
the st. paul
companies, inc. (parent only)
schedule ii -
condensed financial information of registrant
condensed
statement of income information
years ended
december 31, 2002, 2001 and 2000
(in millions)
revenues:
net
investment income
$
$
$
realized
investment gains (losses)
(7
)
other
total
revenues
expenses:
interest
expense
administrative
and other expenses
total
expenses
loss
before income tax benefit
(231
)
(186
)
(225
)
income
tax benefit
(237
)
(58
)
(89
)
income
(loss) from continuing operations - parent company only
(128
)
(136
)
equity
in net income (loss) of subsidiaries
(881
)
1,106
income
(loss) from continuing operations before cumulative effect of accounting
change
(1,009
)
cumulative
effect of accounting change
(6
)
income
(loss) from continuing operations
(1,009
)
gain
(loss) from discontinued operations
(25
)
(79
)
consolidated
net income (loss)
$
$
(1,088
)
$
see accompanying notes to
condensed financial information.
the st. paul
companies, inc. (parent only)
schedule ii -
condensed financial information of registrant
condensed
statement of cash flows information
years ended
december 31, 2002, 2001 and 2000
(in millions)
operating
activities:
net
income (loss)  parent only
$
$
(128
)
$
(136
)
cash
dividends from subsidiaries
net
tax payments (to) from subsidiaries
(191
)
net
federal income tax refund (payments)
(110
)
adjustments
to reconcile net loss to net cash provided by operating activities:
pretax
realized investment (gains) losses
(24
)
(8
)
provision
for federal deferred tax expense (benefit)
(93
)
other
changes in income taxes payable/refundable
(141
)
(213
)
(114
)
other
cash
provided (used) by operating activities
(183
)
investing
activities:
purchases
of investments
(94
)
(155
)
(278
)
proceeds
from sales and maturities of investments
capital
contributions and loans to subsidiaries
(1,168
)
(821
)
(119
)
proceeds
received upon assumption of subsidiary debt
proceeds
from sale of subsidiaries
proceeds
from payment of note receivable
discontinued
operations
(6
)
(6
)
(9
)
purchase
of property and equipment
(18
)
other
(1
)
cash
used by investing activities
(657
)
(774
)
(134
)
financing
activities:
dividends
paid to shareholders
(253
)
(245
)
(241
)
proceeds
from issuance of debt
proceeds
from issuance of company stock
repayment
and maturities of debt and preferred securities
(279
)
(216
)
(259
)
proceeds
from issuance of preferred securities
repurchase
of common shares
(1
)
(589
)
(536
)
stock
options exercised and other
cash
provided (used) by financing activities
(441
)
change
in cash
(5
)
(4
)
cash
at beginning of year
cash
at end of year
$
$
$
see accompanying notes to
condensed financial information.
the st. paul
companies, inc. (parent only)
schedule ii -
condensed financial information of registrant
notes to condensed
financial information
1. the
accompanying condensed financial information should be read in conjunction with
the consolidated financial statements and notes included in our 2002 annual
report to shareholders. the annual
report includes our consolidated statements of shareholders equity and
comprehensive income.
some data in the
accompanying condensed financial information for the years 2001 and 2000 were
reclassified to conform to the 2002 presentation.
2. debt of the parent company
consisted of the following (in millions):
december
31,
external:
commercial
paper
$
$
medium-term
notes
7-7/8%
senior notes
8-1/8%
senior notes
zero
coupon convertible notes
7-1/8%
senior notes
variable
rate borrowings
5-1/4%
senior notes
5-3/4%
senior notes
fair
value of interest rate swap agreements
total
external debt
2,658
1,945
intercompany(1):
subordinated
debentures
guaranteed
psop debt
notes
payable to subsidiaries
total
intercompany debt
1,208
1,044
total
debt
$
3,866
$
2,989
(1) eliminated in
consolidation. the intercompany
subordinated debentures are payable to subsidiary trusts holding solely
convertible subordinated debentures of the company. these trusts issued external financing in the form of
company-obligated mandatorily redeemable preferred securities.
see note 13 to the
consolidated financial statements included in the 2002 annual report to
shareholders for further information on debt outstanding at dec. 31, 2002.
the amount of
debt, other than commercial paper and debt eliminated in consolidation, that
becomes due during each of the next five years is as follows: 2003; $67
million; 2004, $110 million; 2005, $429 million; 2006, $59 million; and 2007,
$1,015 million.
in the normal
course of business, the parent company guarantees the performance of our
consolidated subsidiaries. these
obligations are included in the consolidated financial statements and footnotes
in our 2002 annual report to shareholders.
the st. paul
companies, inc. and subsidiaries
schedule iii -
supplementary insurance information
(in millions)
december
31,
deferred
policy
acquisition
expenses
gross
loss,
loss adjustment
expense reserves
gross
unearned
premiums
property-liability
insurance:
specialty
commercial
$
$
3,694
$
1,244
commercial
lines
5,870
surety
& construction
2,055
international
& lloyds
2,152
total
ongoing segments
13,771
3,493
health
care
2,521
reinsurance
4,337
other
1,647
total
runoff segments
8,505
discontinued
operations
total
$
$
22,626
$
3,816
property-liability
insurance:
specialty
commercial
$
$
3,267
$
1,061
commercial
lines
5,683
surety
& construction
1,659
international
& lloyds
1,876
total
ongoing segments
12,485
2,875
health
care
2,990
reinsurance
4,570
other
1,561
total
runoff segments
9,121
discontinued
operations
total
$
$
22,101
$
3,957
the st. paul
companies, inc. and subsidiaries
schedule iii -
supplementary insurance information
(in millions)
premiums
earned
net
investment
income
insurance
losses,
loss adjustment
expenses
amortization
of policy
acquisition
expenses
other
operating
expenses
premiums
written
property-liability
insurance:
specialty
commercial
$
1,856
$
$
1,214
$
$
$
1,986
commercial
lines
1,760
1,552
1,827
surety
& construction
1,141
1,266
international
& lloyds
total
ongoing segments
5,473
4,197
1,330
5,887
health
care
(2
)
reinsurance
1,071
other
total
runoff segments
1,917
1,798
1,159
net
investment income
1,161
total
$
7,390
$
1,161
$
5,995
$
1,563
$
$
7,046
property-liability
insurance:
specialty
commercial
$
1,410
$
$
1,054
$
$
$
1,564
commercial
lines
1,504
1,028
1,643
surety
& construction
international
& lloyds
total
ongoing segments
4,430
3,380
1,019
4,836
health
care
1,457
reinsurance
1,593
1,922
1,677
other
total
runoff segments
2,866
4,099
2,927
net
investment income
1,199
total
$
7,296
$
1,199
$
7,479
$
1,589
$
$
7,763
property-liability
insurance:
specialty
commercial
$
1,095
$
$
$
$
$
1,211
commercial
lines
1,387
1,456
surety
& construction
international
& lloyds
total
ongoing segments
3,519
2,044
3,861
health
care
reinsurance
1,121
1,074
other
total
runoff segments
2,073
1,869
2,023
net
investment income
1,247
total
$
5,592
$
1,247
$
3,913
$
1,396
$
$
5,884
the st. paul
companies, inc. and subsidiaries
schedule iv -
reinsurance
years ended
december 31, 2002, 2001 and 2000
(in millions)
gross
amount
ceded to
other
companies
assumed
from other
companies
net
amount
percentage
of amount
assumed to
net
property-liability
insurance premiums earned:
$
7,569
$
2,342
$
2,163
$
7,390
29.3
%
$
6,656
$
2,045
$
2,685
$
7,296
36.8
%
$
5,819
$
2,246
$
2,019
$
5,592
36.0
%
the st. paul
companies, inc. and subsidiaries
schedule v -
valuation and qualifying accounts
years ended
december 31, 2002, 2001 and 2000
(in millions)
additions
description
balance at
beginning
of year
charged to
costs and
expenses
charged
to other
accounts(2)
deductions(1)
balance
at end
of year
real
estate valuation adjustment
$
$
allowance
for uncollectible:
agency
loans
$
$
premiums
receivable from underwriting activities
$
$
reinsurance
$
$
deductibles
$
$
real
estate valuation adjustment
$
$
allowance
for uncollectible:
agency
loans
$
$
premiums
receivable from underwriting activities
$
$
reinsurance
$
$
deductibles
$
$
real
estate valuation adjustment
$
$
allowance
for uncollectible:
agency
loans
$
$
premiums
receivable from underwriting activities
$
$
reinsurance
$
$
deductibles
$
$
(1) deductions include write-offs of amounts
determined to be uncollectible, unrealized foreign exchange gains and losses
and, for certain properties in real estate, a reduction in the valuation
allowance for properties sold during the year.
(2) the $5 million included under charged to
other accounts for 2000 represents the uncollectible reinsurance recoverable
reserve of mmi, which we acquired in 2000.
exhibit index*
exhibit
(2) formation and
separation agreement between the st. paul and platinum
underwriters holdings, ltd., dated october 23, 2002***
(3) articles of
incorporation and by-laws
(a) articles of incorporation***
(b) by-laws***
(4) instruments
defining the rights of security holders, including indentures
(a) specimen common
stock certificate***
(9) voting trust
agreements**
(10) material contracts
(a) the senior
executive performance plan***
(b)
employment agreement dated october 10, 2001 between
the st. paul and mr. jay s. fishman***
(c)
employment agreement dated november 5, 2001 between
the st. paul and mr. timothy m. yessman
(1)
(d)
retention incentive agreement dated may 20, 2002 between
the st. paul and john a. maccoll***
(e) deferred stock plan
for non-employee directors***
(f) the amended and
restated senior executive severance policy***
(g) the amended and
restated 1994 stock incentive plan***
(h) the directors
charitable award program, as amended***
(i) the amended and
restated special severance policy***
(j) amendment to the
amended and restated special severance policy***
(k) 1988 stock option
plan***
(l) non-employee
director stock retainer plan***
(m) the annual
incentive plan***
(n) the deferred
management incentive awards plan***
(o) the directors
deferred compensation plan***
(p) benefit
equalization plan - 1995 revision***.
(q) first amendment to
benefit equalization plan - 1995 revision***
(r) executive
post-retirement life insurance plan - summary plan description***.
(s) executive long-term
disability plan - summary plan description***
(t) the st. paul re
long-term incentive plan***
(u) the special
leveraged stock purchase plan***
(11) statements re
computation of per share earnings
(1)
(12) statements re
computation of ratios
(1)
(13) annual report to
security holders
(1)
(16) letter re change
in certifying accountant**
(18) letter re change
in accounting principles**
(21) subsidiaries of
the st. paul.
(1)
(22) published report regarding matters submitted to
vote
of security holders**
(23) consents of
experts and counsel
(a) consent of kpmg llp
(1)
(24) power of attorney
(1)
(99) additional
exhibits**
* the
exhibits are included only with the copies of this report that are filed with
the securities and exchange commission.
however, copies of the exhibits may be obtained from the st. paul for a
reasonable fee by writing to the corporate secretary, the st.paul
companies, inc., 385 washington street, st. paul, minnesota 55102.
** these items are not applicable.
*** these items are incorporated by
reference as described in item 15(a)(3) of this report.
(1) filed
herewith.
