10-k
a06-2768_110k.htm
annual report pursuant to section 13 and 15(d)
united
states securities and exchange commission
washington,
d.c. 20549
form 10-k
annual report pursuant to section 13 or 15(d)
of the
securities exchange act of 1934
for the fiscal
year ended december 31, 2005
or
o transition report pursuant to section 13 or 15(d)
of the
securities exchange act of 1934
for the
transition period from
to
commission
file number 001-10898
the st.
paul travelers companies, inc.
(exact
name of registrant as specified in its charter)
minnesota
41-0518860
(state
or other jurisdiction of
(i.r.s.
employer
incorporation
or organization)
identification
no.)
washington street,
st. paul,
mn 55102
(address
of principal executive offices) (zip code)
(651)
310-7911
(registrants
telephone number, including area code)
securities
registered pursuant to section 12(b) of the act:
title of
each class
nameofeachexchangeon
whichregistered
common stock,
without par value
new york stock
exchange
guarantee with
respect to the 7.6% trust preferred securities
of st. paul travelers capital trust i
new york stock
exchange
4.5% convertible
junior subordinated notes due 2032
new york stock
exchange
securities
registered pursuant to section 12(g) of the act:none
indicate
by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer (as defined in
rule 405 of the securities act).
yesnoo
indicate
by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to
section 13 or section 15(d) of the act.
yesono
indicate
by check mark whether the registrant (1) has filed all reports required to be
filed by section 13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934 during the
preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was
required to file such reports), and (2) has been subject to such filing
requirements for the past 90 days.yesnoo
indicate
by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to item 405 of
regulation s-k is not contained herein, and will not be contained, to the best
of registrants knowledge, in definitive proxy or information statements
incorporated by reference in part iii of this form 10-k or any amendment to
this form 10-k.
indicate
by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an
accelerated filer, or a non-accelerated filer. see definition of accelerated
filer and large accelerated filer in rule 12b-2 of the act (check one):
large
accelerated filer
accelerated filero
non-accelerated filero
indicate
by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in rule
12b-2 of the act). yesono
as
of june 30, 2005, the aggregate market value of the registrants voting and
non-voting common equity held by non-affiliates was $26,618,644,871.
as
of february 23, 2006, 695,913,619 shares of the registrants common stock
(without par value) were outstanding.
documents
incorporated by reference
portions
of the registrants proxy statement relating to the 2006 annual meeting of
shareholders are incorporated by reference into part iii of this report.
the st.
paul travelers companies, inc.
annual
report on form 10-k
for fiscal
year ended december 31, 2005
table of
contents
itemnumber
page
part i
1.
business
1a.
risk factors
1b.
unresolved
staff comments
2.
properties
3.
legal proceedings
4.
submission
of matters to a vote of security holders
part ii
5.
market for
registrants common equity, related shareholder matters and issuer purchases
of equity securities
6.
selected financial
data
7.
managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations
7a.
quantitative
and qualitative disclosures about market risk
8.
financial
statements and supplementary data
9.
changes in
and disagreements with accountants on accounting and financial disclosure
9a.
controls and
procedures
9b.
other information
part iii
10.
directors
and executive officers of the registrant
11.
executive
compensation
12.
security
ownership of certain beneficial owners and management and related shareholder
matters
13.
certain
relationships and related transactions
14.
principal
accounting fees and services
part iv
15.
exhibits and
financial statement schedules
signatures
index to consolidated
financial statements and schedules
exhibit index
part i
item1. business
the
st. paul travelers companies, inc. (together with its consolidated
subsidiaries, the company) is a holding company principally engaged, through
its subsidiaries, in providing a wide range of commercial and personal property
and casualty insurance products and services to businesses, government units,
associations and individuals. the company, known as the st. paul companies,
inc. (spc) prior to its merger with travelers property casualty corp. (tpc) in
2004, is incorporated as a general business corporation under the laws of the
state of minnesota and is one of the oldest insurance organizations in the
united states, dating back to 1853. the principal executive offices of the
company are located at 385 washington street, st. paul, minnesota 55102, and
the telephone number is (651) 310-7911.
on
april 1, 2004, tpc merged with a subsidiary of spc, as a result of which tpc
became a wholly-owned subsidiary of spc, and spc changed its name to the st.
paul travelers companies, inc. for accounting purposes, this transaction was
accounted for as a reverse acquisition with tpc treated as the accounting
acquirer. accordingly, this transaction was accounted for as a purchase
business combination, using tpcs historical financial information and applying
fair value estimates to the acquired assets, liabilities and commitments of spc
as of april 1, 2004. beginning on april 1, 2004, the results of operations and
financial condition of spc were consolidated with tpcs results of operations
and financial condition. accordingly, all financial information presented
herein for the twelve months ended december 31, 2004 reflects the accounts of
tpc for the three months ended march 31, 2004 and the consolidated accounts of
spc and tpc for the nine months ended december 31, 2004. the financial
information presented herein for 2003 reflects the accounts of tpc. in
connection with the merger, each issued and outstanding share of tpc class a
and class b common stock (including the associated preferred stock purchase
rights) was exchanged for 0.4334 of a share of the companys common stock. all
share and per share amounts for all prior periods have been restated to reflect
the exchange of tpcs common stock, par value $0.01 per share, for the companys
common stock without designated par value, except with regard to share
information related to the tpc initial public offering in 2002.
tpc
is a connecticut corporation that was formed in 1979 and, prior to its march
2002 initial public offering of class a common stock (ipo), was an indirect
wholly-owned subsidiary of citigroup inc. (together with its consolidated
subsidiaries, citigroup). tpc was reorganized in connection with its ipo in
march 2002. pursuant to the reorganization, which was completed on march 19,
2002, tpcs consolidated financial statements were adjusted to exclude the
accounts of certain formerly wholly-owned tpc subsidiaries, principally the
travelers insurance company and its subsidiaries (being the former u.s. life
insurance operations of tpc), certain other wholly-owned non-insurance
subsidiaries of tpc and substantially all of tpcs assets and certain
liabilities not related to the property casualty insurance business.
in
the ipo, on march 21, 2002, tpc issued 231 million shares* of its class a
common stock, representing approximately 23% of tpcs common equity. after the
ipo, citigroup inc. beneficially owned all of the 500 million shares* of tpcs
outstanding class b common stock, each share of which was entitled to seven
votes, and 269 million shares* of tpcs class a common stock, each share of which
was entitled to one vote, representing at the time 94% of the combined voting
power of all classes of tpcs voting securities and 77% of the equity interest
in tpc. on august 20, 2002, citigroup made a tax-free distribution to its
stockholders (the citigroup distribution), of a portion of its ownership
interest in tpc, which, together with the shares issued in the ipo, represented
more than 90% of tpcs common equity and more than 90% of the combined voting
power of tpcs outstanding voting securities. citigroup received a private
letter ruling from the internal revenue service that the citigroup distribution
was tax-free to citigroup, its stockholders and tpc. as part of the ruling process,
citigroup agreed to vote the shares it continued to hold of tpc following the
citigroup distribution pro rata with the shares held by the public and to
divest the remaining shares it holds within five years following the citigroup
distribution. after the merger, this undertaking also applies to shares of
company common stock.
at
december 31, 2005 and 2004, citigroup held for its own account 1.80% and 6.50% of
the companys outstanding common stock, respectively. at december 31, 2003,
citigroup held for its own account 9.87% of tpcs outstanding common stock.
the
following discussion of the companys business is organized as follows: (i) a
description of each of the companys three business segments (commercial,
specialty and personal) and related services; (ii) a description of interest
expense and other; and (iii) certain other information. for a summary of the
companys revenues, operating income (loss) and total assets by reportable
business segments, see note 5 of notes to the companys consolidated financial
statements.
* share amounts are unadjusted for
the merger of tpc and spc.
property-casualty insurance operations
commercial
the commercial
segment offers a broad array of property and casualty insurance and
insurance-related services to its clients. commercial is organized into the
following three marketing and underwriting groups, each of which focuses on a
particular client base and which collectively comprise commercials core
operations:
commercial accounts serves primarily mid-sized businesses for casualty products and large
and mid-sized businesses for property products. in addition to the traditional
middle market, commercial accounts includes seven units dedicated to unique
business needs.
select accounts serves small businesses and offers commercial multi-peril, property,
general liability, commercial auto and workers compensation insurance.
national accounts comprises three distinct business units. the largest provides casualty
products and services to large companies, with particular emphasis on workers
compensation, general liability and automobile liability. national accounts
also includes the commercial residual market business, which primarily offers
workers compensation products and services to the involuntary market. in
addition, national accounts includes discover re, which provides unbundled
property and casualty insurance products to insureds who utilize programs such
as self-insurance, collateralized deductibles and captive reinsurers.
commercial also
includes the special liability group (which manages the companys asbestos and
environmental liabilities); the assumed reinsurance, health care, and certain
international and other runoff operations; and policies written by the companys
gulf operation (gulf), which was placed into runoff during the second quarter
of 2004. these operations are collectively referred to as commercial other.
selected market and product information
the
following table sets forth commercial net written premiums by market and
product line for the periods indicated. for a description of the product lines
and markets referred to in the table, see principal markets and methods of
distribution and product lines, respectively.
(for the year ended december 31, in millions)
% of
total
by market:
commercial
accounts
$
4,386
$
4,210
$
3,251
52.0
%
select accounts
2,722
2,555
2,047
32.3
national
accounts
1,230
1,040
14.6
total commercial
core
8,338
7,805
6,129
98.9
commercial other
1.1
total
commercial by market
$
8,429
$
8,311
$
6,862
100.0
%
by product line (1):
commercial
multi-peril
$
2,890
$
2,517
$
2,246
34.3
%
workers
compensation
1,660
1,530
1,234
19.7
commercial
automobile
1,660
1,609
1,313
19.7
property
1,399
1,472
1,166
16.6
general
liability
1,130
9.2
other
0.5
total
commercial by product line
$
8,429
$
8,311
$
6,862
100.0
%
(1)
the reporting of spc products was conformed to the companys product
definitions beginning with policy renewals on and after january 1, 2005. accordingly,
the amounts reported by product line are not comparable for the years 2004 and
2005.
principal markets and methods of distribution
many
national accounts customers require insurance-related services in addition to
or in lieu of pure risk coverage, primarily for workers compensation and, to a
lesser extent, general liability and commercial automobile exposures. these
types of services include risk management services, such as claims
administration, loss control and risk management information services, and are
generally offered in connection with large deductible or self-insured programs.
these services generate fee income rather than net written premiums.
the
commercial segment distributes its products through approximately 6,300
independent agencies and brokers located throughout the united states that are
serviced by approximately 90 field offices and three customer service centers.
in recent years, the commercial segment, particularly in its select accounts
operation, has made significant investments in enhanced technology utilizing
internet-based applications to provide real-time interface capabilities with
independent agencies and brokers. commercial builds relationships with
well-established, independent insurance agencies and brokers. in selecting new
independent agencies and brokers to distribute its products, commercial
considers each agencys or brokers profitability, financial stability, staff
experience and strategic fit with its operating and marketing plans. once an
agency or broker is appointed, commercial carefully monitors its performance.
commercial accounts sells a broad range of property and casualty
insurance products through a large network of independent agents and brokers.
commercial accounts casualty products primarily target mid-sized businesses
with 50 to 1,000 employees, while its property products target large and
mid-sized businesses. the company offers a full line of products to its
commercial accounts customers with an emphasis on guaranteed cost programs. a
key objective of commercial accounts is continued focus on first party product
lines of business, which cover risks of loss to property of the insured
beyond
the traditional middle market network, dedicated underwriting units exist to
complement the middle market or specifically respond to the unique or unusual business
client insurance needs. these units are as follows:
national property provides insurance coverage
for large commercial property schedules and mid-sized risks covering losses on
buildings, business assets and business interruption exposures.
transportation provides auto liability,
damage coverage, cargo and general liability coverages to the trucking
industry. products have been developed for non-fleet (generally 1-10 units) and
fleet (11+ units) customers and are distributed through general agents.
boiler and machinery provides comprehensive
breakdown coverages for equipment including property and business interruption
coverages. through the boilerre unit, boiler and machinery also provides
reinsurance, underwriting, engineering, claim handling and risk management
services to other property casualty carriers that do not have in-house
expertise.
inland marine provides insurance which
generally covers articles that may be transported from one place to another,
goods in transit (other than transoceanic) and movable objects. coverages
include builders risk, contractors equipment, fine arts, jewelers, motor
truck cargo and transportation risks.
agribusiness offers property and liability
coverages other than workers compensation for farms, ranches and larger
commercial growers of agricultural products.
excess and surplus coverages are written on a
non-admitted basis through established wholesalers. coverages typically
underwritten include commercial auto and general liability.
national programs offers tailored insurance
products to commercial insureds with similar risk characteristics, underwritten
on a program basis. programs are typically marketed through a single
distribution channel. the targeted industries include entertainment, leisure,
service, retail and sports.
select accounts is a leading provider of property casualty
products to small businesses. it serves firms with generally fewer than 50
employees. products offered by select accounts are guaranteed cost policies,
often a packaged product covering property and liability exposures. products
are sold through independent agents and brokers, who are often the same agents
and brokers that sell the companys commercial accounts, specialty and personal
products. in addition to the traditional small commercial agency network,
select accounts has a dedicated servicing unit that serves unique customer
needs, including small national programs, architects and engineers, and
emerging distribution markets.
select
accounts offers its independent agents a system for small businesses that helps
them connect all aspects of sales and service through a comprehensive service
platform. components of the platform include agency automation capabilities and
service centers that function as an extension of an agencys customer service
operations, both of which are highly utilized by agencies. more than 86% of
select accounts eligible business volume is processed by agencies using its
automated issuance systems, which allow agents to quote and issue policies from
agency offices. approximately 4,600 agencies have chosen to take advantage of
select accounts service centers, which offer agencies a wide range of
services, including coverage and billing inquiries, policy changes, the
assistance of licensed service professionals and extended hours of operations.
national accounts sells a variety of casualty products and
services to large companies. national accounts clients generally select
loss-sensitive products in connection with a large deductible or self-insured
program and, to a lesser extent, a retrospectively rated or a guaranteed cost
insurance policy. through a network of field offices, the companys
underwriting specialists work closely with national and regional brokers to
tailor insurance programs to meet clients needs. workers compensation
accounted for approximately 76% of sales to national accounts customers during
2005, based on direct written premiums and fees. national accounts generated $405
million of fee income in 2005, excluding commercial residual market business
discussed below.
national
accounts also includes the companys commercial residual market business. the
companys commercial residual market business sells claims and policy management
services to workers compensation and automobile assigned risk plans and to
self-insurance pools throughout the united states. the company services
approximately 36% of the total workers compensation assigned risk market. the
company is one of only two servicing carriers that operate nationally. assigned
risk plan contracts generated approximately $203 million in fee income in 2005.
national
accounts also includes the companys discover
re operation, which
principally provides commercial auto liability, general liability, workers
compensation and property coverages. it serves retail brokers and insureds who
utilize programs such as self-insurance, collateralized deductibles and captive
reinsurers.
commercial other includes the special liability group (which
manages the companys asbestos and environmental liabilities); the assumed
reinsurance, health care, and certain international runoff and other operations;
and gulf, which was placed into runoff during the second quarter of 2004.
certain business previously written by gulf is now being written in commercial
accounts and in the companys specialty segment. gulf provided specialty
coverages including management and professional liability, excess and surplus
lines, environmental, umbrella and fidelity. gulf also provided insurance
products specifically designed for financial institutions, the entertainment
industry and sports organizations.
pricing and underwriting
pricing
levels for commercial property and casualty insurance products are generally
developed based upon an expectation of estimated losses, the expenses of
producing business and managing claims, and a reasonable allowance for profit.
commercial has a disciplined approach to underwriting and risk management that
emphasizes profitable growth rather than premium volume or market share.
commercial
has developed an underwriting and pricing methodology that incorporates
underwriting, claims, engineering, actuarial and product development
disciplines for particular industries. this approach is designed to maintain
high quality underwriting and pricing discipline. it utilizes proprietary data
gathered and analyzed with respect to its commercial business over many years.
the underwriters and engineers use this information to assess and evaluate
risks prior to quotation. this information provides specialized knowledge about
specific industry segments. this methodology enables commercial to streamline
its risk selection process and develop pricing parameters that will not
compromise commercials underwriting integrity.
for
smaller businesses, select accounts uses a process based on industry
classifications to allow agents and field underwriting representatives to make
underwriting and pricing decisions within predetermined classifications, because
underwriting criteria and pricing tend to be more standardized for these
smaller exposures.
a
significant portion of commercial business is written with large deductible
insurance policies. under workers compensation insurance contracts with
deductible features, the company is obligated to pay the claimant the full
amount of the claim. the company is subsequently reimbursed by the
contractholder for the deductible amount, and is subject to credit risk until
such reimbursement is made. at december 31, 2005, contractholder receivables
and payables on unpaid losses associated with large deductible policies were
each approximately $5.23 billion. retrospectively rated policies are also used
for workers compensation coverage. although the retrospectively rated feature
of the policy substantially reduces insurance risk for the company, it
introduces additional credit risk to the company. premium receivables from
holders of retrospectively rated policies totaled approximately $308 million at
december 31, 2005. significant collateral, primarily letters of credit and, to
a lesser extent cash collateral and surety bonds, is generally requested for
large deductible plans and/or retrospectively rated policies that provide for
deferred collection of deductible recoveries and/or ultimate premiums. the
amount of collateral requested is predicated upon the creditworthiness of the
customer and the nature of the insured risks. commercial continually monitors
the credit exposure on individual accounts and the adequacy of collateral.
the
company continually monitors its exposure to natural and manmade peril
catastrophic losses and attempts to mitigate such exposure. the company uses
various analyses and methods, including sophisticated computer modeling
techniques, to analyze underwriting risks of business in hurricane-prone,
earthquake-prone and target risk areas. the company relies upon this analysis
to make underwriting decisions designed to manage its exposure on catastrophe-exposed
business. the company also utilizes reinsurance to manage its aggregate
exposures to catastrophes. see reinsurance.
product lines
commercial multi-peril provides a combination of property and
liability coverage. property insurance covers damages such as those caused by
fire, wind, hail, water, theft and vandalism, and protects businesses from
financial loss due to business interruption resulting from a covered loss.
liability coverage insures businesses against third parties from accidents occurring
on their premises or arising out of their operations, such as injuries
sustained from products sold.
workers compensation provides coverage for employers for
specified benefits payable under state or federal law for workplace injuries to
employees. there are typically four types of benefits payable under workers
compensation policies: medical benefits, disability benefits, death benefits
and vocational rehabilitation benefits. the company emphasizes managed care
cost containment strategies, which involve employers, employees and care
providers in a cooperative effort that focuses on the injured employees early
return to work, cost-effective quality care, and customer service in this
market. the company offers the following three types of workers compensation
products:
guaranteed cost insurance products, in which
policy premium charges are fixed for the period of coverage and do not vary as
a result of the insureds loss experience;
loss-sensitive insurance products, including
large deductible and retrospectively rated policies, in which fees or premiums
are adjusted based on actual loss experience of the insured during the policy
period; and
service programs, which are generally sold to
the companys national accounts customers, where the company receives fees
rather than premiums for providing loss prevention, risk management, and claim
and benefit administration services to organizations under service agreements.
the company also participates in state assigned risk pools as a servicing
carrier and pool participant.
commercial automobile provides coverage for businesses against
losses incurred from personal bodily injury, bodily injury to third parties,
property damage to an insureds vehicle, and property damage to other vehicles
and other property resulting from the ownership, maintenance or use of
automobiles and trucks in a business.
property provides coverage for loss or damage to buildings, inventory and
equipment from natural disasters, including hurricanes, windstorms, earthquakes,
hail, and severe winter weather. also covered are manmade events such as theft,
vandalism, fires, explosions, terrorism and financial loss due to business
interruption resulting from covered property damage. for additional information
on terrorism coverages, see terrorism risk insurance act of 2002 and
terrorism risk insurance extension act of 2005. property also includes
specialized equipment insurance, which provides coverage for loss or damage
resulting from the mechanical breakdown of boilers and machinery, and ocean and
inland marine, which provides coverage for goods in transit and unique,
one-of-a-kind exposures.
general liability provides coverage for liability exposures
including bodily injury and property damage arising from products sold and
general business operations. specialized liability policies may also include
coverage for directors and officers liability arising in their official
capacities, employment practices liability insurance, fiduciary liability for
trustees and sponsors of pension, health and welfare, and other employee
benefit plans, errors and omissions insurance for employees, agents,
professionals and others arising from acts or failures to act under specified
circumstances, as well as umbrella and excess insurance. errors and omissions
insurance for professionals (such as lawyers, accountants, doctors and other
health care providers) is sometimes also known as professional liability
insurance.
geographic distribution
the
following table shows the distribution of commercials direct written premiums
for the states that accounted for the majority of premium volume for the year
ended december 31, 2005:
state
% of
total
california
13.5
%
new york
8.0
texas
6.3
florida
5.3
illinois
4.8
massachusetts
4.6
new jersey
4.5
pennsylvania
3.7
all others (1)
49.3
total
100.0
%
(1) no other single state accounted for 3.0% or
more of the total direct written premiums written in 2005 by the company.
specialty
the
specialty segment was created upon the merger of tpc and spc. it combined spcs
specialty operations, including spcs bond and construction operations, with
tpcs bond and construction operations, which were included in tpcs commercial
segment prior to the merger. the specialty segment provides a full range of
standard and specialized insurance coverages and services through dedicated
underwriting, claims handling and risk management groups. in many of its
businesses, specialty competes through the use of proprietary rates and policy
forms. the segment comprises two primary groups: domestic specialty and
international specialty.
domestic specialty includes the following marketing and
underwriting organizations, each of which possesses customer expertise and
offers products and services to address its respective customers specific
needs:
bond provides a wide range of customers with
specialty products built around the companys market leading surety bond
business along with an expanding executive liability practice for middle and
small market private companies and not-for-profit organizations. bonds range
of products includes fidelity and surety bonds, directors and officers
liability insurance, errors and omissions insurance, professional liability
insurance, employment practices liability insurance, fiduciary liability
insurance, and other related coverages.
construction offers a variety of products and services,
including traditional insurance, consisting of workers compensation, general
liability and commercial auto coverages, and other risk management solutions,
to a broad range of contractors. the company offers guaranteed cost products
for smaller and mid-sized policyholders and loss sensitive programs for larger
accounts where the customer and the company work together in actively managing
and controlling exposure and claims and where they share risk through policy
features such as deductibles or retrospective rating.
financial and professional
services provides professional
liability and management liability coverages for public corporations against
losses caused by the negligence or misconduct of named directors and officers, professional
liability coverages for a variety of professionals such as lawyers, insurance
agents and real estate agents for liability from errors and omissions committed
in the course of professional conduct or practice, and a full range of
insurance coverages including property, auto, liability, fidelity and
professional liability coverages for financial institutions.
other domestic specialties include the following underwriting groups
that provide unique combinations of insurance coverage, risk management, claims
handling and other services for a targeted clients needs:
technology offers a well-balanced comprehensive
portfolio of specialty products and services to companies involved in
telecommunications, information technology, medical technology and electronics
manufacturing. these products include property, commercial auto, general
liability, workers compensation, umbrella, internet liability, technology
errors and omissions coverages and global companion products.
public sector services markets insurance products and services to
public entities including municipalities, counties, indian nation gaming and
selected special government districts such as water and sewer utilities. the
policies written by this business group typically cover property, commercial
auto, general liability and errors and omissions exposures.
ocean marine underwrites a diverse portfolio of coverages
for all forms of marine transportation and the companies that serve them, as
well as other businesses involved in international trade. the companys product
offerings fall under six main coverage categories: marine liability, cargo,
hull and machinery, protection and indemnity, pleasure craft, and marine
property and liability.
oil and gas provides specialized property and liability
products and services for customers involved in the exploration and production
of oil and natural gas including operators and drilling contractors as well as
various service and supply companies and manufacturers that support upstream
operations. the policies written by this business group insure drilling rigs,
natural gas facilities, and production and gathering platforms, and cover risks
including physical damage, liability and business interruption.
underwriting facilities underwrites liability and property facilities
produced by wholesalers and managing general agents (mgas). mgas are licensed
insurance agents that manage customers with unique requirements, primarily
those with moderate- to high-hazard exposures requiring expertise in the
surplus lines marketplace and the ability to use policy forms not subject to
regulatory requirements. coverages include property, commercial auto and
general liability.
umbrella/excess and surplus
group, which consists of two
distinct business units:
(a) specialty excess and
umbrella (seu) focuses on
umbrella and excess liability business distributed by retail agents and
brokers, where other insurance companies are providing the primary coverage.
this group also provides coverages in the case where other company business
groups prefer to outsource the underwriting of umbrella and excess business
based on the expertise and/or limit capacity of seu. the coverages underwritten
are typically commercial auto, general liability and product liability.
umbrella coverage may also be underwritten over a company that retains risk or
has a self-insured retention, instead of a scheduled underlying policy.
(b) excess & surplus lines
(e&s lines) offers
mono-line umbrella and excess coverage where the company does not write the
primary casualty coverage, or where other business groups within the company
prefer to outsource the underwriting of umbrella and excess business based on
the expertise and/or limit capacity of e&s lines. business is written on a
non-admitted basis through established wholesalers. the coverages typically
underwritten include commercial auto, general liability and product liability.
in november 2005, the
company sold its personal catastrophe risk business, which had been included in
the specialty segment. in accordance with the terms of the agreement, the
company retained responsibility for the pre-sale claims and claim adjustment
expense reserves related to this business and remains responsible for any
changes in estimates in those reserves through a quota-share reinsurance
agreement.
international specialty includes coverages marketed and underwritten
to several specialty customer groups within the united kingdom, canada and the
republic of ireland, the companys participation in lloyds, and the global
underwriting business group.
specialtys
international operations are
located in the united kingdom, canada and the republic of ireland, where it
offers specialized insurance and risk management services to several specialty
customer groups, including those in the technology, public services, and
financial and professional services industry sectors. the companys
international operations primarily underwrite employers liability (similar to
workers compensation coverage in the united states), public and product
liability (the equivalent of general liability), professional indemnity
(similar to professional liability coverage), motor (similar to automobile
coverage in the united states) and property.
the
global underwriting business
group underwrites home-foreign business, representing coverage for a u.s.
organizations property-liability exposures in a foreign country, and reverse-flow
business, which involves coverage of a foreign organizations property or
liability exposures located in the united states, as part of a global program
controlled by foreign insurers.
at
lloyds, specialty underwrites
four principal lines of businessaviation, marine, global property, and accident
and special risksthrough syndicate 5000, for which the company provides 100%
of the capital. during the second half of 2004, the company made a decision to
exit certain portions of the lloyds personal lines business. in early 2005,
the company sold the right to renew this business as well as the operating
companies that supported it.
select market and product information
the
following table sets forth specialty net written premiums by market and product
line for the periods indicated. for a description of the markets and product
lines referred to in the table, see principal markets and methods of
distribution and product lines, respectively.
(for the year ended december 31, in millions)
%oftotal
by market:
bond
$
1,267
$
1,183
$
22.1
%
construction
16.0
financial and
professional services
14.9
other
1,605
1,186
28.0
total domestic
specialty
4,638
3,849
1,255
81.0
international
specialty
1,091
19.0
total
specialty by market
$
5,729
$
4,771
$
1,258
100.0
%
by product line (1):
general
liability
$
2,104
$
1,535
$
36.7
%
fidelity and
surety
1,026
17.9
workers
compensation
7.7
commercial automobile
6.5
property
10.1
commercial
multi-peril
2.1
international
1,091
19.0
total
specialty by product line
$
5,729
$
4,771
$
1,258
100.0
%
(1)
the reporting of spc products was conformed to the companys product
definitions beginning with policy renewals on and after january 1, 2005. accordingly,
the amounts reported by product line are not comparable for the years 2004 and
2005.
principal markets and methods of distribution
specialty
distributes the majority of its specialty commercial products domestically
through the same base of approximately 6,300 independent agencies and brokers
that distribute the commercial segments products. these brokers and
independent agencies are located throughout the united states and are serviced
by three customer service centers. in recent years, specialty has made
significant investments in enhanced technology utilizing internet-based
applications to provide real-time interface capabilities with its independent
agencies and brokers. specialty specifically seeks distribution specialists
that match the specialty expertise of its underwriting group. specialty builds
relationships with well-established, independent insurance agencies and
brokers. in selecting new independent agencies and brokers to distribute its
products, specialty considers each agencys or brokers profitability,
financial stability, staff experience and strategic fit with its operating and
marketing plans. once an agency or broker is appointed, its ongoing performance
is monitored.
specialty
also distributes property and casualty products through selected wholesalers
using surplus lines contracts, both on a brokerage and managing general
underwriting basis. wholesalers are used because they serve certain markets
that are not typically served by our appointed retail agents. the wholesale
surplus lines market allows for more flexibility to write certain classes of
business due to the absence of rate and form regulation for surplus lines
business. in working with wholesalers on a
brokerage
basis, specialty underwrites the business and sets the premium level. in
working with wholesalers on a managing general underwriting (mgu) basis, the
mgus produce and underwrite business that conforms to specialtys underwriting
guidelines that have been specifically designed for each facility.
specialty
distributes its specialty products internationally through brokers in the domestic
markets of each of the three countries in which it operates, the united
kingdom, canada and the republic of ireland. specialty also writes business at
lloyds, where its products are distributed through lloyds accredited brokers.
by virtue of lloyds worldwide licenses, specialty has access to international
markets across the world.
pricing and underwriting
pricing
levels for specialty property and casualty insurance products are generally
developed based upon an expectation of estimated losses, the expenses of
producing business and managing claims, and a reasonable allowance for profit.
specialty has a disciplined approach to underwriting and risk management that
emphasizes profitable growth rather than premium volume or market share.
specialty
has developed an underwriting and pricing methodology that incorporates
dedicated underwriting, claims, engineering, actuarial and product development
disciplines for particular industries. this approach is designed to maintain
high quality underwriting and pricing discipline, based on an in-depth
knowledge of the specific industry. the underwriters and engineers use
proprietary data gathered and analyzed over many years to assess and evaluate
risks prior to quotation, and then use proprietary forms to tailor insurance
coverage to insureds within the target markets. this methodology enables
specialty to streamline its risk selection process and develop pricing
parameters that will not compromise its underwriting integrity.
a
portion of specialty business is written with large deductible insurance
policies. under some workers compensation insurance contracts with deductible
features, specialty is obligated to pay the claimant the full amount of the
claim. specialty is subsequently reimbursed by the contractholder for the
deductible amount and is subject to credit risk until such reimbursement is
made. at december 31, 2005, contractholder receivables and payables on unpaid
losses associated with large deductible policies were each approximately $281 million.
significant collateral, primarily letters of credit and, to a lesser extent
surety bonds and cash collateral, is generally requested for large deductible
plans that provide for deferred collection of deductibles. the amount of
collateral requested is predicated upon the creditworthiness of the customer
and the nature of the insured risks. specialty continually monitors the credit
exposure and the adequacy of collateral.
product lines
general liability provides coverage for liability exposures
including bodily injury and property damage arising from products sold and
general business operations. specialized liability policies may also include
coverage for directors and officers liability arising in their official
capacities, employment practices liability insurance, fiduciary liability for
trustees and sponsors of pension, health and welfare, and other employee
benefit plans, errors and omissions insurance for employees, agents,
professionals and others arising from acts or failures to act under specified
circumstances, as well as umbrella and excess insurance. errors and omissions
insurance for professionals (such as lawyers, accountants, doctors and other
health care providers) is sometimes also known as professional liability
insurance.
fidelity and surety provides fidelity insurance coverage, which
protects an insured for loss due to embezzlement or misappropriation of funds
by an employee, and surety, which is a three-party agreement whereby the
insurer agrees to pay a third party or make complete an obligation in response
to the default, acts or omissions of an insured. surety is generally provided
for construction performance, legal matters such as appeals, trustees in
bankruptcy and probate and other performance bonds. this product line includes
surety business written in the companys following subsidiaries: st. paul
guarantee (canada), afianzadora insurgentes (mexico) and st. paul travelers
casualty and surety company of europe (united kingdom).
workers compensation provides coverage for employers for
specified benefits payable under state or federal law for workplace injuries to
employees. there are typically four types of benefits payable under workers
compensation policies: medical benefits, disability benefits, death benefits
and vocational rehabilitation benefits. the company emphasizes managed care
cost containment strategies, which involve employers, employees and care
providers in a cooperative effort that focuses on the injured employees early
return to work, cost-effective, quality care and customer service in this
market.
commercial automobile provides coverage for businesses against
losses incurred from personal bodily injury, bodily injury to third parties,
property damage to an insureds vehicle, and property damage to other vehicles
and other property resulting from the ownership, maintenance or use of
automobiles and trucks in a business.
property provides coverage for loss or damage to buildings, inventory and
equipment from natural disasters, including hurricanes, windstorms,
earthquakes, hail, and severe winter weather. also covered are manmade events
such as theft, vandalism, fires, explosions, terrorism and financial loss due
to business interruption resulting from covered property damage. for additional
information on terrorism coverages, see reinsuranceterrorism risk insurance
act of 2002. property also includes ocean and inland marine insurance, which
provides coverage for goods in transit, and unique one-of-a-kind exposures.
commercial multi-peril provides a combination of property and
liability coverage. property insurance covers damages such as those caused by
fire, wind, hail, water, theft and vandalism, and protects businesses from
financial loss due to business interruption resulting from a covered loss.
liability coverage insures businesses against third parties from accidents
occurring on their premises or arising out of their operations, such as
injuries sustained from products sold.
international provides coverage predominantly through operations in the united
kingdom, canada and the republic of ireland, and at lloyds. the coverage
provided in those markets includes employers liability (similar to workers
compensation coverage in the united states), public and product liability (the
equivalent of general liability), professional indemnity (similar to directors
and officers or errors and omissions coverages), motor (similar to automobile
coverage in the united states) and property. while the covered hazard may be similar
to those in the u.s. market, the different legal environments can make the
product risks and coverage terms potentially very different from those in the
united states. international does not include surety business written in the
companys canadian, mexican or united kingdom subsidiaries.
geographic distribution
the
following table shows the distribution of specialtys direct written premiums
for the states that accounted for the majority of domestic specialty premium
volume for the year ended december 31, 2005:
state
% of
total
california
12.2
%
texas
8.8
new york
7.3
florida
7.0
illinois
4.2
pennsylvania
3.6
new jersey
3.2
massachusetts
3.0
all others (1)
50.7
total
100.0
%
(1) no other single state accounted for 3.0% or
more of the total direct written premiums written in 2005 by the company.
personal
personal
writes virtually all types of property and casualty insurance covering personal
risks. the primary coverages in personal are automobile and homeowners
insurance sold to individuals. these products are distributed through
independent agents, sponsoring organizations such as employee and affinity
groups, and joint marketing arrangements with other insurers.
selected product and distribution channel information
the
following table sets forth net written premiums for personal by product line
for the periods indicated. for a description of the product lines referred to
in the accompanying table, see product lines. in addition, see principal
markets and methods of distribution for a discussion of distribution channels
for personals product lines.
(for the year ended december 31, in millions)
%oftotal
by product line:
personal
automobile
$
3,477
$
3,433
$
3,054
55.8
%
homeowners and
other
2,751
2,496
2,027
44.2
total personal
$
6,228
$
5,929
$
5,081
100.0
%
principal markets and methods of distribution
personal
products are distributed primarily through approximately 7,800 independent
agents located throughout the united states, supported by personnel in eleven
marketing regions, three single state companies and six business service
centers. in selecting new independent agencies to distribute its products,
personal considers each agencys profitability, financial stability, staff
experience and strategic fit with personals operating and marketing plans.
once an agency is appointed, personal carefully monitors its performance. while
the principal markets for personals insurance products are in states along the
east coast, in the south and texas, personal is expanding its geographic
presence across the united states.
personal
operates single state companies in massachusetts, new jersey and florida with
products marketed primarily through independent agents. these states
represented approximately 19% of personal direct written premiums in 2005. the
companies were established to manage complex markets in massachusetts and new
jersey and property catastrophe exposure in florida. each company has dedicated
resources in underwriting, claim, finance, legal and service functions.
personal
uses a consistent operating model with agents outside of the single state
companies (see discussion above). the model provides technological alternatives
to agents to maximize their ease of doing business. personal agents quote and
issue approximately 98% of personals policies directly from their agencies by
leveraging either their own agency management system or using personals
proprietary quote and issuance systems which allows agents to rate, quote and
issue policies on line. all of these quote and issue platforms interface with
personals underwriting and rating systems, which edit transactions for compliance
with personals underwriting and pricing programs. business processed by agents
on these platforms is subject to consultative review by personals in-house
underwriters. personal also provides a download capability that refreshes the
individual agency system databases of approximately 4,800 agents each day with
updated policy information.
personal
continues to develop functionality to provide its agents with a comprehensive
array of online service capabilities packaged together in an easy-to-use agency
service portal, including customer service, marketing and claim functionality.
agencies can also choose to shift the ongoing core service responsibility for
personals customers to one of the companys four customer care centers, where
the company renders customer service on behalf of an agency by providing a
comprehensive array of direct customer service needs, including response to
billing and coverage inquiries, and policy changes. approximately 1,190 agents
take advantage of this service alternative.
personal
also markets through additional distribution channels, including sponsoring
organizations such as employers and consumer associations, and joint marketing
arrangements with other insurers. personal handles the sales and service for
these programs either through a sponsoring independent agent or through two of
the companys call center locations. the company is one of the leading
providers of personal lines products to members of affinity groups. a number of
well-known corporations make available the companys product offerings to their
employees primarily through a payroll deduction payment process. the company
has significant relationships with the majority of the american automobile
association (aaa) clubs in the united states and other affinity groups that
make available personals product offerings to their members. since 1995, the
company has had a marketing agreement with geico to underwrite homeowners
business for their auto customers. this agreement has added profitable business
and helped to geographically diversify the homeowners line of business.
pricing and underwriting
pricing
levels for personal property and casualty insurance products are generally
developed based upon an expectation of estimated losses, the expense of
producing, issuing and servicing the business and a reasonable allowance for
profit and contingencies. the company has a disciplined approach to
underwriting and risk management that emphasizes profitable growth rather than
premium volume or market share.
personal
has developed a product management methodology that integrates the disciplines
of underwriting, claim, actuarial and product development. this approach is
designed to maintain high quality underwriting discipline and pricing
segmentation. proprietary data is analyzed with respect to personals business
over many years. personal uses a variety of proprietary and vendor produced
risk differentiation models to facilitate its pricing segmentation. personals product
managers establish strict underwriting guidelines integrated with its filed
pricing and rating plans, which enable personal to streamline its risk
selection and pricing processes.
pricing
for personal automobile insurance is driven by changes in the frequency of
claims and by inflation in the cost of automobile repairs, medical care and
litigation of liability claims. as a result, the profitability of the business
is largely dependent on promptly identifying and rectifying disparities between
premium levels and projected claim costs, and obtaining approval from state
regulatory authorities when necessary for filed rate changes.
pricing
in the homeowners business is also driven by changes in the frequency of claims
and by inflation in the cost of building supplies, labor and household
possessions. most homeowners policies offer, but do not require, automatic
increases in coverage to reflect growth in replacement costs and property
values. in addition to the normal risks associated with any multiple peril
coverage, the profitability and pricing of homeowners insurance is affected by
the incidence of natural disasters, particularly those related to weather and
earthquakes. in order to reduce the companys exposure to catastrophe losses,
personal limits the writing of new homeowners business and selectively takes
underwriting action on existing business in some markets. in addition,
underwriting standards have been tightened, price increases have been
implemented in some catastrophe-prone areas, and deductibles are in place in
hurricane and wind and hail prone areas. personal uses computer-modeling
techniques to assess its level of exposure to loss in hurricane and earthquake
catastrophe-prone areas. changes to methods of marketing and underwriting in
some jurisdictions are subject to state-imposed restrictions, which can make it
more difficult for an insurer to significantly reduce catastrophe exposures.
insurers
writing personal lines property and casualty policies may be unable to increase
prices until some time after the costs associated with coverage have increased,
primarily because of state insurance rate regulation. the pace at which an
insurer can change rates in response to increased costs depends, in part, on
whether the applicable state law requires prior approval of rate increases or
notification to the regulator either before or after a rate change is imposed.
in states with prior approval laws, rates must be approved by the regulator
before being used by the insurer. in states having file-and-use laws, the
insurer must file rate changes with the regulator, but does not need to wait
for approval before using the new rates. a use-and-file law requires an
insurer to file rates within a period of time after the insurer begins using
the new rate. approximately one-half of the states require prior approval of
most rate changes.
independent
agents either submit applications to the companys service centers for
underwriting review, quote, and issuance or they utilize one of its automated
quote and issue systems. automated transactions are edited by the companys
systems and issued if they conform to established guidelines. exceptions are
reviewed by underwriters in the companys business centers. audits are
conducted by business center underwriters and agency managers, on a systematic
sampling basis, across all of the companys independent agency generated
business. each agent is assigned to a specific employee or team of employees
responsible for working with the agent on business plan development, marketing,
and overall growth and profitability. the company uses agency level management
information to analyze and understand results and to identify problems and
opportunities.
the
personal products sold through additional marketing channels utilize the same
quote and issuance systems discussed previously and exceptions are underwritten
by the companys employees. underwriters work with company management on
business plan development, marketing, and overall growth and profitability.
channel-specific production and claim information is used to analyze results
and identify problems and opportunities.
product lines
the
primary coverages in personal are personal automobile and homeowners insurance
sold to individuals. personal had approximately 6.6 million policies in force
at december 31, 2005.
personal automobile provides coverage for liability to others
for both bodily injury and property damage and for physical damage to an
insureds own vehicle from collision and various other perils. in addition,
many states require policies to provide first-party personal injury protection,
frequently referred to as no-fault coverage.
homeowners and other provides protection against losses to
dwellings and contents from a wide variety of perils, as well as coverage for
liability arising from ownership or occupancy. the company writes homeowners
insurance for dwellings, condominiums and rental property contents. the company
also writes coverage for personal watercraft, personal articles such as
jewelry, and umbrella liability protection.
geographic distribution
the
following table shows the distribution of personals direct written premiums
for the states that accounted for the majority of premium volume for the year ended
december 31, 2005:
state
% of
total
new york
16.3
%
texas
9.2
pennsylvania
7.1
massachusetts
7.0
new jersey
6.3
florida
6.0
virginia
4.7
georgia
4.5
connecticut
4.3
california
3.9
maryland
3.0
all others (1)
27.7
total
100.0
%
(1) no other single state accounted for 3.0% or
more of the total direct written premiums written in 2005 by the company.
claims management
the
companys claims management strategies, together with its focus on optimizing claim
outcomes, cost efficiency and service are critical to the companys ability to
grow profitably and reflect these core tenets:
fair, efficient, fact-based claims management
controls losses for the company and its customers;
use of advanced technology provides
front-line claim professionals with necessary information and facilitates
prompt claim resolution;
specialization of claim professionals and
segmentation of claims by complexity, as indicated by severity, coverage and
causation, allow the company to focus its resources effectively;
effective collaboration, using meaningful
management information, across all divisions within the company facilitates
product analysis and enhances risk selection and risk pricing; and
excellent customer service enhances customer
retention.
the
companys claims function is managed through its claim services operations.
with nearly 13,000 employees, claim services employs a diverse group of
professionals, including claim adjusters, appraisers, attorneys, investigators,
engineers, accountants, system specialists and training, management and support
personnel. approved external service providers, such as independent adjusters
and appraisers, investigators and attorneys, are available for use as
appropriate.
field
claim management teams located in 32 claim centers and 89 satellite and
specialty-only offices in 49 states are organized to maintain focus on the
specific claim characteristics unique to the businesses within the commercial,
specialty and personal segments. claim teams with specialized skills,
resources, and workflows are matched to the unique exposures of those
businesses with local claim management dedicated to achieving optimal results
within each segment. the companys home office operations provide additional
support in the form of workflow design, quality management, information
technology, advanced management information and data analysis, training,
financial reporting and control, and human resources strategy. in addition to
the field teams, claim staff is dedicated to each of personals single state
companies in florida, massachusetts and new jersey. this structure permits the
company to maintain the economies of scale of a larger, established company
while retaining the agility to respond promptly to the needs of customers,
brokers, agents and underwriters.
an
integral part of the companys strategy to benefit customers and shareholders
is its continuing industry leadership in the fight against insurance fraud
through its investigative services unit. the company has a nationwide staff of
experts that investigate a wide array of insurance fraud schemes using in-house
forensic resources and other technological tools. this staff also has specialized
expertise in fire scene examinations, medical provider fraud schemes and data
mining. the company also dedicates investigative resources to ensure that
violations of law are reported to and prosecuted by law enforcement agencies.
claim
services uses advanced technology, management information, and data analysis to
assist the company in reviewing its claim practices and results to evaluate and
improve its performance. the companys claim management strategy is focused on
segmentation of claims and appropriate technical specialization to drive
effective claim resolution. the company continually monitors its investment in
claim resources to maintain an effective focus on claim outcomes and a
disciplined approach to continual improvement. in recent years, the company has
invested significant additional resources in many of its claim handling operations and routinely
monitors the effect of its investments to ensure a consistent optimization
between outcomes, cost, and service.
the
companys proven catastrophe response strategy and its catastrophe claim
handling teams were instrumental in its response to a variety of
weather-related losses that impacted the insurance industry in both 2005 and
2004, including hurricanes katrina, rita and wilma (2005), and hurricanes
charley, frances, ivan and jeanne (2004).
the
company is also a leader in bringing effective claim solutions that provide
superior customer service. one example of this is conciergeclaimth,
a new worry-free auto claim service that features select auto repair facilities
with company appraisers on site to complete an estimate, handle all rental
arrangements and monitor the repair process from start to finish. by managing
the claim in this way, the company can help ensure prompt, quality results and create
a differentiated, superior claim experience for customers.
another
strategic advantage is travcompth,
a workers compensation claim resolution and medical management program that
assists adjusters in the prompt investigation and effective management of
workers compensation claims. innovative medical and claims management
technologies permit nurse, medical and claims professionals to share
appropriate vital information that supports prompt investigation, effective
return to work and claim resolution strategies. these technologies, together
with effective matching of professional skills and authority to specific claim
issues, have resulted in more efficient management of workers compensation
claims with lower medical, wage replacement costs and loss adjustment expenses.
reinsurance
the
company reinsures a portion of the risks it underwrites in order to control its
exposure to losses and protect capital resources. the company cedes to
reinsurers a portion of these risks and pays premiums based upon the risk and
exposure of the policies subject to such reinsurance. ceded reinsurance
involves credit risk, except with regard to mandatory pools, and is generally
subject to aggregate loss limits. although the reinsurer is liable to the
company to the extent of the reinsurance ceded, the company remains liable as
the direct insurer on all risks reinsured. reinsurance recoverables are
reported after reductions for known insolvencies and after allowances for
uncollectible amounts. the company also holds collateral, including trust
agreements, escrow funds and letters of credit, under certain reinsurance
agreements. the company monitors the financial condition of reinsurers on an
ongoing basis and reviews its reinsurance arrangements periodically. reinsurers
are selected based on their financial condition, business practices and the
price of their product offerings. for additional information concerning
reinsurance, see note 8 of notes to the companys consolidated financial
statements.
the
company utilizes a variety of reinsurance agreements to manage its exposure to
large property and casualty losses, including:
facultative reinsurance, in which reinsurance
is provided for all or a portion of the insurance provided by a single policy
and each policy reinsured is separately negotiated;
treaty reinsurance, in which reinsurance is
provided for a specified type or category of risks; and
catastrophe reinsurance, in which the company
is indemnified for an amount of loss in excess of a specified retention with
respect to losses resulting from a catastrophic event.
the
following presents the companys top five reinsurer groups, by reinsurance
recoverables at december 31, 2005 (in millions):
reinsurer group
reinsurance
recoverables
a.m. best rating of groups predominant reinsurer
munich re group
$
1,304
a
third highest of 16 ratings
swiss re group
a+
second highest of 16 ratings
ge insurance
services group
a
third highest of 16 ratings
berkshire
hathaway group
a++
highest of 16 ratings
american
international group
a+
second highest of 16 ratings
in
november 2005, the swiss re group announced that it had agreed to acquire ge
insurance solutions, the fifth largest reinsurer worldwide, from general
electric company. upon expected consummation of this transaction in mid-2006,
the swiss re group would become the companys largest reinsurer group with
recoverables of $1.69 billion as of december 31, 2005. consequently, the xl
capital group is expected to become the companys fifth largest reinsurer group
with recoverables of $651 million as of december 31, 2005.
at
december 31, 2005, the company had $19.57 billion in reinsurance recoverables.
of this amount, $2.21 billion was for mandatory pools and associations that
relate primarily to workers compensation service business and have the
obligation of the participating insurance companies on a joint and several
basis supporting these cessions. an additional $3.99 billion was attributable
to structured settlements relating primarily to personal injury claims, for
which the company has purchased annuities and remains contingently liable in
the event of a default by the companies issuing the annuities. of the remaining
$13.37 billion of reinsurance recoverables at december 31, 2005, $1.20 billion
was attributable to asbestos and environmental claims, and the remainder
principally reflected reinsurance in support of ongoing and runoff business. at
december 31, 2005, $2.40 billion of reinsurance recoverables were
collateralized by letters of credit, trust agreements and escrow funds. also at
december 31, 2005, the company had an allowance for estimated uncollectible
reinsurance recoverables of $804 million.
for
a description of reinsurance-related litigation, see item 3, legal
proceedings.
current net retention policy
the
descriptions below relate to the companys reinsurance arrangements in effect
at january 1, 2006. most property and casualty reinsurance agreements have terrorism
sublimits or exclusions. for third party liability, commercial limits the net
retention to a maximum of $8 million per insured, per occurrence after
reinsurance. for third party liability, including but not limited to umbrella
liability, professional liability, directors and officers liability, and
employment practices liability, specialty generally limits the net retentions
to $16 million per policy after reinsurance. the net retained amount per risk
for commercial and specialty property is limited to $15 million, after
reinsurance. for surety protection, the company generally retains up to $24.5
million probable maximum loss (pml) per principal but may retain higher amounts
based on the type of obligation, credit quality and other credit risk factors.
personal retains the first $5 million of umbrella policies and purchases
facultative reinsurance for limits over $5 million. for personal property
insurance, there is a $6 million maximum retention per risk. the company also
utilizes facultative reinsurance to provide additional limits capacity or to
reduce retentions on an individual risk basis. the company may also retain
amounts greater than those described herein based upon the individual
characteristics of the risk.
catastrophe reinsurance
the
company utilizes a reinsurance agreement with nonaffiliated reinsurers to
manage its exposure to losses resulting from one occurrence. for the
accumulation of net property losses arising out of one occurrence, the general
catastrophe reinsurance treaty covers 70% or $875 million of total losses
between $750 million and $2 billion. this agreement excludes nuclear, chemical,
biochemical and radiological losses for domestic terrorism and all terrorism
losses as defined by the terrorism risk insurance act of 2002 and the terrorism
risk insurance extension act of 2005. this agreement covers all of the
companys business except that business written by st paul travelers insurance
company limited. for business underwritten in the united kingdom, republic of
ireland and in the companys operations at lloyds, separate reinsurance
protections are purchased locally which have lower net retentions more
commensurate with the size of the respective local balance sheet. the company
conducts an ongoing review of its risk and catastrophe coverages and makes
changes as it deems appropriate.
at
december 31, 2005, the company had coverage for one additional limit under its
general catastrophe reinsurance treaty, the term of which runs to june 30,
2006. in part as a result of the severity and frequency of storms in
2005 and 2004, the company expects the cost of reinsurance to increase, and
there may be reduced availability of reinsurance coverage.
terrorism risk insurance act of 2002 and terrorism
risk insurance extension act of 2005
on november 26, 2002, the
terrorism risk insurance act of 2002 (the terrorism act) was enacted into
federal law and established the terrorism risk insurance program (the program),
a temporary federal program in the department of the treasury, that provided
for a system of shared public and private compensation for insured losses
resulting from acts of terrorism or war committed by or on behalf of a foreign
interest. the program was scheduled to terminate on december 31, 2005. on
december 22, 2005, the terrorism risk insurance extension act of 2005 (the
terrorism extension act) was enacted into federal law, reauthorizing the
program through december 31, 2007, while reducing the federal role under the
program. in order for a loss to be covered under the program (subject losses),
the loss must meet certain aggregate industry loss minimums that vary by
program year of amounts $100 million or less, and must be the result of an
event that is certified as an act of terrorism by the u.s. secretary of the
treasury. the original program excluded from participation certain of the
following types of insurance: federal crop insurance, private mortgage
insurance, financial guaranty insurance, medical malpractice insurance, health
or life insurance, flood insurance, and reinsurance. the terrorism extension
act exempted from coverage certain additional types of insurance, including
commercial automobile, professional liability (other than directors and
officers), surety, burglary and theft, and farm-owners multi-peril. in
the case of a war declared by congress, only workers compensation losses are
covered by the terrorism act and the terrorism extension act. both acts
generally require that all commercial property casualty insurers licensed in
the united states participate in the program. under the program, a
participating insurer is entitled to be reimbursed by the federal government
for a percentage of subject losses, after an insurer deductible, subject to an
annual cap. the federal reimbursement percentage remains at 90% for 2006,
but decreases to 85% in 2007. in each case, the deductible is calculated
by applying the deductible percentage to the insurers direct earned premiums
for covered lines from the calendar year immediately preceding the applicable
year. the deductible under the program was 7% for 2003, 10% for 2004 and 15%
for 2005, and will be 17.5% for 2006 and 20% for 2007. the companys
estimated deductible under the program is $1.91 billion for 2006. the
annual cap limits the amount of aggregate subject losses for all participating
insurers to $100 billion. once subject losses have reached the $100 billion
aggregate during a program year, there is no additional reimbursement from the
u.s. treasury and an insurer that has met its deductible for the program year
is not liable for any losses (or portion thereof) that exceed the $100 billion
cap. the company had no terrorism-related losses in 2005, 2004 or 2003.
florida reinsurance fund
the
company also participates in the florida hurricane catastrophe fund (fhcf),
which is a state-mandated catastrophe reinsurance fund that will provide
reimbursement to insurers for a portion of their residential catastrophic
hurricane losses. the fhcf is primarily funded by premiums from insurance
companies that write residential property business in florida and, if
insufficient, assessments on all florida
property and casualty lines of business, excluding accident and health,
the national flood insurance program, workers compensation, and medical
malpractice insurance. the fhcfs resources are limited to these contributions
and to its borrowing capacity at the time of a significant catastrophe in
florida. based on current expected reimbursements for 2004 and 2005 losses, it
is expected that the fhcf will be able to pay its obligations without levying
assessments. however, if there is future subsequent loss development on the
fhcfs share of the 2004 and 2005 hurricane losses or additional hurricanes in
2006, there can be no assurance that the cash resources of the fhcf will be
sufficient to meet its obligations and assessments may be necessary.
reserves
claim
and claim adjustment expense reserves (loss reserves) represent managements
estimate of ultimate unpaid costs of losses and loss adjustment expenses for
claims that have been reported and claims that have been incurred but not yet
reported.
management
continually refines its reserve estimates in a regular ongoing process that
includes review of key assumptions, underlying variables and historical loss
experience. the company reflects adjustments to reserves in the results of
operations in the periods in which the estimates are changed. in establishing
reserves, the company takes into account estimated recoveries for reinsurance,
salvage and subrogation. the reserves are also reviewed regularly by a
qualified actuary employed by the company. for
additional information on the process of estimating reserves and a discussion
of underlying variables and risk factors, see item 7managements discussion
and analysis of financial condition and results of operationscritical
accounting estimates.
the
process of estimating loss reserves involves a high degree of judgment and
requires the consideration of a number of variables. these variables (discussed
by product line in the critical accounting estimates section) are affected by
both internal and external events, such as changes in claims handling
procedures, inflation, judicial trends and legislative changes, among others.
the impact of many of these items on ultimate costs of claims and claim
adjustment expenses is difficult to estimate. reserve estimation difficulties
also differ significantly by product line due to differences in the underlying
insurance contract (e.g., claims made versus occurrence), claim complexity, the
volume of claims, the potential severity of individual claims, determining the
occurrence date for a claim, and reporting lags (the time between the
occurrence of the insured event and when it is actually reported to the
insurer). informed judgment is applied throughout the process.
the
company derives estimates for unreported claims and development on reported
claims principally from actuarial analyses of historical patterns of loss
development by accident year for each type of exposure and business unit.
similarly, the company derives estimates of unpaid loss adjustment expenses
principally from actuarial analyses of historical development patterns of the
relationship of loss adjustment expenses to losses for each line of business
and type of exposure. for a description of the companys reserving methods for
asbestos and environmental claims, see item 7asbestos claims and litigation,
and environmental claims and litigation.
discounting
included
in the claims and claim adjustment expense reserves in the consolidated balance
sheet are certain reserves discounted to the present value of estimated future
payments. the liabilities for losses for some long-term disability payments
under workers compensation insurance and workers compensation excess
insurance, which totaled $1.92 billion and $1.99 billion at december 31, 2005
and 2004, respectively, were discounted using a rate of 5% at december 31, 2005
and a range of rates from 3.5% to 5% at december 31, 2004. reserves related to
certain fixed and determinable asbestos-related settlements, where all payment
amounts and their timing are known, totaled $34 million and $67 million at
december 31, 2005 and 2004, respectively. these reserves were discounted using
a rate of 2.6% at december 31, 2005, and at a range of rates from 2.3% to 2.6%
at december 31, 2004. reserves for certain assumed reinsurance business were
discounted using a range of rates from 5% to 7.5%, and totaled $79 million and
$126 million at december 31, 2005 and 2004, respectively.
other factors
the
table on page 21 sets forth the year-end reserves from 1995 through 2005 and
the subsequent changes in those reserves, presented on a historical basis. the
original estimates, cumulative amounts paid and reestimated reserves in the
table for the years 1995 through 2003 have not been restated to reflect the
acquisition of spc in 2004. the table includes spc reserves beginning at
december 31, 2004.
the original estimates, cumulative amounts paid and reestimated
reserves in the table for the years
1995 to 2000 have also not
been restated to reflect the acquisition of northland and commercial guaranty
casualty, and the year 1995 in the table has not been restated to reflect the
acquisition of aetnas property and casualty insurance subsidiaries.
beginning in 1996 and 2001, the table includes the reserve activity of aetnas
property and casualty insurance subsidiaries, and northland and commercial
guaranty casualty, respectively. the data in the table is presented in
accordance with reporting requirements of the securities and exchange
commission (sec). care must be taken to avoid misinterpretation by those
unfamiliar with this information or familiar with other data commonly reported
by the insurance industry. the accompanying data is not accident year data, but
rather a display of 1995 to 2005 year-end reserves and the subsequent changes
in those reserves.
for
instance, the cumulative deficiency or redundancy shown in the accompanying
table for each year represents the aggregate amount by which original estimates
of reserves as of that year end have changed in subsequent years. accordingly,
the cumulative deficiency for a year relates only to reserves at that year-end
and those amounts are not additive. expressed another way, if the original
reserves at the end of 1995 included $4 million for a loss that is finally paid
in 2005 for $5 million, the $1 million deficiency (the excess of the actual
payment of $5 million over the original estimate of $4 million) would be
included in the cumulative deficiencies in each of the years 1995 to 2004 shown
in the accompanying table.
various
factors may distort the re-estimated reserves and cumulative deficiency or
redundancy shown in the accompanying table. for example, a substantial portion
of the cumulative deficiencies shown in the accompanying table arise from
claims on policies written prior to the mid-1970s involving liability exposures
such as asbestos and environmental claims. in the post-1984 period, the company
has developed more stringent underwriting standards and policy exclusions and
has significantly contracted or terminated the writing of these risks. see
item 7asbestos claims and litigation, and environmental claims and
litigation. general conditions and trends that have affected the development
of these liabilities in the past will not necessarily recur in the future.
other
factors that affect the data in the accompanying table include the discounting
of certain reserves, as discussed above, and the use of retrospectively rated
insurance policies. for example, workers compensation indemnity reserves
(tabular reserves) are discounted to reflect the time value of money. apparent
deficiencies will continue to occur as the discount on these workers
compensation reserves is accreted at the appropriate interest rates. also, a
portion of national accounts business is underwritten with retrospectively
rated insurance policies in which the ultimate loss experience is primarily
borne by the insured. for this business, increases in loss experience result in
an increase in reserves and an offsetting increase in amounts recoverable from
insureds. likewise, decreases in loss experience result in a decrease in
reserves and an offsetting decrease in amounts recoverable from these insureds.
the amounts recoverable on these retrospectively rated policies mitigate the
impact of the cumulative deficiencies or redundancies on the companys earnings
but are not reflected in the accompanying table.
because
of these and other factors, it is difficult to develop a meaningful
extrapolation of estimated future redundancies or deficiencies in loss reserves
from the data in the accompanying table.
the
differences between the reserves, net of reinsurance, for claims and claim
adjustment expenses shown in the accompanying table, which is prepared in
accordance u.s. generally accepted accounting principles and those reported in
the companys annual reports filed with insurance regulators, which are
prepared in accordance with statutory accounting practices, were $(296)
million, $(282) million and $26 million for 2005, 2004 and 2003, respectively.
the increase in the differences in 2005 and 2004 compared with the difference
in 2003 was primarily driven by the impact of a reinsurance contract which the
company entered into in 2004 that provides coverage for prior accident years.
(atdecember31,inmillions)
1995(a)
1996(a)
1997(a)
1998(a)
1999(a)
2000(a)
2001(a)(b)
2002(a)(b)
2003(a)(b)
2004(a)(b)(c)
2005(a)(b)(c)
reservesforclaims
and claimadjustment expense originally estimated
$
10,090
$
21,816
$
21,406
$
20,763
$
19,983
$
19,435
$
20,197
$
23,268
$
24,055
$
41,446
$
42,895
cumulative
amounts paid as of
one year later
1,521
3,704
4,025
4,159
4,082
4,374
5,018
5,170
4,651
8,871
two years later
2,809
6,600
6,882
6,879
6,957
7,517
8,745
8,319
8,686
three years later
3,903
8,841
8,850
9,006
9,324
10,218
11,149
11,312
four years later
4,761
10,355
10,480
10,809
11,493
12,000
13,402
five years later
5,322
11,649
11,915
12,565
12,911
13,603
six years later
5,842
12,893
13,376
13,647
14,172
seven years later
6,146
14,154
14,306
14,697
eight years later
6,668
14,987
15,225
nine years later
7,013
15,844
ten years later
7,411
reserves
reestimated as of
one year later
9,848
21,345
21,083
20,521
19,736
19,394
23,228
23,658
24,222
41,706
two years later
9,785
21,160
20,697
20,172
19,600
22,233
24,083
24,592
25,272
three years later
9,789
20,816
20,417
19,975
22,302
22,778
25,062
25,553
four years later
9,735
20,664
20,168
22,489
22,612
23,871
25,953
five years later
9,711
20,427
22,570
22,593
23,591
24,872
six years later
9,661
22,851
22,625
23,492
24,559
seven years later
10,562
22,861
23,530
24,446
eight years later
10,553
23,759
24,425
nine years later
10,945
24,601
ten years later
11,363
cumulative
deficiency(a)(b)(c)
1,273
2,785
3,019
3,683
4,576
5,437
5,756
2,285
1,217
gross liabilityend
of year
$
15,213
$
30,969
$
30,138
$
29,411
$
28,854
$
28,312
$
30,617
$
33,628
$
34,474
$
58,984
$
61,007
reinsurance
recoverables
5,123
9,153
8,732
8,648
8,871
8,877
10,420
10,360
10,419
17,538
18,112
net liabilityend
of year
$
10,090
$
21,816
$
21,406
$
20,763
$
19,983
$
19,435
$
20,197
$
23,268
$
24,055
$
41,446
$
42,895
gross reestimated
liability-latest
$
16,473
$
33,765
$
33,242
$
33,567
$
34,390
$
35,406
$
37,991
$
36,961
$
36,074
$
59,191
reestimated
reinsurance recoverables-latest
5,110
9,164
8,817
9,121
9,831
10,534
12,038
11,408
10,802
17,485
net reestimated
liability-latest
$
11,363
$
24,601
$
24,425
$
24,446
$
24,559
$
24,872
$
25,953
$
25,553
$
25,272
$
41,706
gross cumulative
deficiency
$
1,260
$
2,796
$
3,104
$
4,156
$
5,536
$
7,094
$
7,374
$
3,333
$
1,600
$
$
2,029
$
4,370
$
4,301
$
4,235
$
4,178
$
4,128
$
3,939
$
$
$
included in the cumulative
deficiency by year is the impact of unfavorable prior year reserve development,
net of reinsurance, related to asbestos claims and litigation, primarily due to
$2,945 million of unfavorable development in 2002, accretion of discount of $25
million in 2003, $416 million of unfavorable development in 2004 and
unfavorable development of $831 million in 2005, as follows, in millions:
(a) for 1995, excludes aetna p&c reserves, which were acquired on april
2, 1996. accordingly, the reserve development (net reserves for claims and
claim adjustment expenses reestimated as of subsequent years less net reserves
recorded at the end of the year, as originally estimated) for 1995 relates only
to losses recorded by tpc and does not include reserve development recorded by
aetna p&c. for 1996 and subsequent years, includes aetna p&c reserves
and subsequent development recorded by aetna p&c. at december 31, 1996
aetna p&c gross reserves were $15,555 million and net reserves were $11,608
million.
(b) includes reserves of the northland company and its subsidiaries and
commercial guaranty lloyds insurance company which were acquired from citigroup
on october 1, 2001. also includes reserves of commercial guaranty casualty
insurance company, which was contributed to tpc by citigroup on october 3,
2001. at december 31, 2001, these gross reserves were $867 million and net
reserves were $633 million.
(c) for years prior to 2004, excludes spc reserves, which were acquired on
april 1, 2004. accordingly, the reserve development (net reserves for claims
and claim adjustment expenses reestimated as of subsequent years less net
reserves recorded at the end of the year, as originally estimated) for years
prior to 2004 relates only to losses recorded by tpc and does not include
reserve development recorded by spc. for 2004 and subsequent year, includes spc
reserves and subsequent development recorded by spc. at december 31, 2004, spc
gross reserves were $23,274 million and net reserves were $15,959 million.
asbestos and environmental claims
asbestos
and environmental claims are segregated from other claims and are handled
separately by the companys special liability group, a separate unit staffed by
dedicated legal, claim, finance and engineering professionals. for additional
information on asbestos and environmental claims, see item 7managements
discussion and analysis of financial conditions and results of operations.
intercompany reinsurance pooling arrangements
most
of the companys insurance subsidiaries are members of intercompany property
and casualty reinsurance pooling arrangements. pooling arrangements permit the
participating companies to rely on the capacity of the entire pools capital
and surplus rather than just on its own capital and surplus. under such
arrangements, the members share substantially all insurance business that is
written, and allocate the combined premiums, losses and expenses. during 2005,
the company combined the previously separate st. paul insurance group and
travelers property casualty pools, forming the new st. paul travelers
reinsurance pool effective july 1, 2005, retroactive to january 1, 2005.
travelers indemnity company is the lead company of the new pool, which includes
28 companies. the company also merged gulf insurance company, the lead company
of the former gulf insurance group, into travelers indemnity company effective
july 1, 2005. as of december 31, 2005, there were two intercompany pooling
arrangements: the st. paul travelers reinsurance pool and the northland pool.
ratings
ratings
are an important factor in setting the companys competitive position in the
insurance marketplace. the company receives ratings from the following major
rating agencies: a.m. best company (a.m. best), fitch ratings (fitch), moodys
investors service (moodys) and standard & poors corp. (s&p). rating
agencies typically issue two types of ratings: claims-paying (or financial
strength) ratings which assess an insurers ability to meet its financial
obligations to policyholders and debt ratings which assess a companys
prospects for repaying its debts and assist lenders in setting interest rates
and terms for a companys short and long term borrowing needs. agency ratings
are not a recommendation to buy, sell or hold any security, and they may be
revised or withdrawn at any time by the rating organization. each agencys
rating should be evaluated independently of any other agencys rating. the
system and the number of rating categories can vary widely from rating agency
to rating agency. customers usually focus on claims-paying ratings, while
creditors focus on debt ratings. investors use both to evaluate a companys
overall financial strength. the ratings issued on the company or its subsidiaries
by any of these agencies are announced publicly and are available on the
companys website and from the agencies.
the
companys insurance operations could be negatively impacted by a downgrade in
one or more of the companys financial strength ratings. if this were to occur,
there could be a reduced demand for certain products in certain markets.
additionally, the companys ability to access the capital markets could be
impacted and higher borrowing costs may be incurred.
the
following rating agency actions were taken with respect to the company in 2005
and 2006:
on january 6, 2005, a.m. best affirmed
the financial strength rating of a of st. paul guarantee insurance company
and withdrew the financial strength rating of a+ of travelers casualty and
surety company of canada (assigned an nr-5, not formerly followed rating). both
ratings were removed from under review with developing implications. st. paul
guarantee insurance company was assigned a rating outlook of stable. these
actions followed the january 1, 2005 completion of the amalgamation of st. paul
guarantee insurance company and travelers casualty and surety company of
canada.
on january 31, 2005, a.m. best placed the
financial strength rating of a+ of travelers property casualty pool and the
debt ratings of a- on senior debt, bbb+ on subordinated debt, bbb on
trust preferred securities, bbb on preferred stock and amb-1 on commercial
paper of the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and its subsidiaries under
review with negative implications, pending the close of a potential divestiture
of the companys investment in nuveen investments. concurrently, a.m. best
affirmed the financial strength rating of a of the st. paul insurance group.
the rating outlook was stable.
on january 31, 2005, s&p affirmed
its a+ counterparty credit and financial strength ratings on the members of
the st. paul insurance group pool, the members of the travelers intercompany
pool, travelers casualty and surety co., of america, and travelers casualty and
surety co. of europe ltd. with a stable outlook. s&p also affirmed its
bbb+/a-2 counterparty credit rating on the st. paul travelers companies, inc.
with a stable outlook.
on january 31, 2005, fitch affirmed the
a- long-term issuer and senior debt ratings of the st. paul travelers
companies, inc., travelers property casualty corp. and travelers insurance
group holdings, inc. the aa- insurer financial strength (ifs) ratings of
members of the travelers property casualty group and the st. paul insurance
group pool were also affirmed. the outlook for all ratings was stable.
on february 1, 2005, moodys affirmed the
long-term debt ratings (senior unsecured debt at a3) of the st. paul travelers
companies, inc. and also affirmed the aa3 insurance financial strength (ifsr)
of the members of the legacy travelers intercompany pool. the outlook for these
ratings was changed to negative from stable. moodys also placed the a1 ifsr of
the legacy st. paul intercompany pool and the a2 ifsr of united states fidelity
and guaranty company on review for possible upgrade. the outlook on the a2 ifsr
of the gulf intercompany pool subsidiaries was changed to positive from stable.
the outlook of the a1 ifsr of travelers casualty and surety company of europe,
limited was changed to positive from developing.
on april 18, 2005, a.m. best affirmed the
financial strength rating of a+ of travelers property casualty pool and the
debt ratings of a- on senior debt, bbb+ on subordinated debt, bbb on
trust preferred securities, bbb on preferred stock and amb-1 on commercial
paper of the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries. a.m. best
also removed these ratings from under review and assigned a stable outlook. the
ratings had been placed under review pending the close of a potential divesture
of the companys investment in nuveen investments.
on july 13, 2005, a.m. best assigned a financial strength rating
(fsr) of a+ and an issuer credit rating (icr) of aa- to the members of the
newly formed st. paul travelers reinsurance pool. this ratings action followed
the companys announcement that it had combined the st. paul and travelers
pools, forming a new pool effective july 1, 2005, retroactive to january 1,
2005 and merged gulf insurance company, the lead company of the former gulf
insurance group, with and into travelers indemnity company, the lead company of
the new pool, effective july 1, 2005. the 28 participants in the new pool, 17 reinsured
affiliates and travelers casualty and surety of america constitute the 46
members of a.m. bests new rating unit, st. paul travelers insurance companies.
as a result of the new pooling arrangement, a.m. best upgraded the fsrs to a+
from a and the icrs to aa- from a of the 18 members of the former st.
paul insurance group; affirmed the fsrs of a+ and icrs of aa- of the 24
members of the former travelers property casualty pool; and upgraded the fsrs
to a+ from a- and icrs to aa- from a- of three members of the former
gulf insurance group. in addition, a.m. best affirmed the debt ratings of a-
on senior debt, bbb+ on subordinated debt, bbb on trust preferred
securities, bbb on preferred stock and amb-1 on commercial paper of the
company and its subsidiaries. the outlook for all ratings was stable.
on july 14, 2005, moodys upgraded the insurance financial strength
ratings of the legacy st. paul, united states fidelity and guaranty (usf&g)
and gulf insurance group to aa3 following the completion of the pooling of
the st. paul and usf&g companies with the legacy travelers property
casualty pool (whose pooled companies were already rated aa3 for insurance
financial strength) and the merger of the gulf insurance company with and into
travelers indemnity company. moodys also affirmed the long-term and short-term
ratings of the st. paul travelers companies, inc. (senior unsecured debt at
a3, commercial paper at prime-2) and those of its downstream debt-issuing
subsidiaries. the ratings outlook was negative.
on september 29, 2005, fitch affirmed all ratings of the st. paul
travelers companies, inc., including the a- long-term issuer rating; the a-
rating on the companys senior unsecured notes; and the bbb+ ratings on the
companys subordinated notes and capital securities. additionally, fitch
affirmed the aa- insurer financial strength (ifs) ratings on members of the
st. paul travelers reinsurance pool. the rating outlooks were stable.
on november 17, 2005, s&p changed the
debt rating outlook of the st. paul travelers companies, inc. to positive
from stable. s&p also changed the
outlook of members of the st. paul travelers insurance group to positive from
stable.
on november 21, 2005, a.m. best assigned a debt rating of a- to the
$400 million senior unsecured notes due 2015 issued by the company in november
2005.
on november 21, 2005, s&p assigned its bbb+ senior debt rating to
the $400 million senior unsecured notes due 2015 issued by the company in
november 2005.
on november 21, 2005, fitch assigned an a- debt rating to the $400
million senior unsecured notes due 2015 issued by the company in november 2005.
on november 22, 2005, moodys assigned an a3 debt rating to the $400
million senior unsecured notes due 2015 issued by the company in november 2005.
on february 2, 2006, fitch affirmed all ratings of the company,
including the a- long-term issuer rating, a- ratings on the companys
senior unsecured notes, and bbb+ ratings on the companys subordinated notes
in capital securities. additionally, fitch affirmed the aa- insurer financial
strength (ifs) ratings on members of the st. paul travelers inter-company pool.
the rating outlooks are stable.
claims  paying ratings
the
following table summarizes the current claims-paying (or financial strength)
ratings of the st. paul travelers reinsurance pool, travelers c&s of
america, northland pool, travelers personal single state companies, travelers
europe, discover reinsurance company, afianzadora insurgentes, s.a., st. paul
guarantee insurance company and st. paul travelers insurance company limited by
a.m. best, moodys, s&p and fitch as of february 27, 2006. the table also
presents the position of each rating in the applicable agencys rating scale.
a.m. best
moodys
s&p
fitch
st. paul travelers reinsurance pool(a,b)
a+(2ndof16)
aa3(4thof21)
a+(5thof21)
aa-(4thof24)
travelers c&s of america
a+ (2nd of 16)
aa3 (4th of 21)
a+ (5th of 21)
aa- (4th of 24)
northland pool(c)
a (3rd of 16)
first floridian auto and home ins. co.
a (3rd of 16)
aa- (4th of 24)
first trenton indemnity company
a (3rd of 16)
aa- (4th of 24)
the premier insurance co. of ma
a (3rd of 16)
aa-(4th of 24)
travelers europe
a+ (2nd of 16)
aa3 (4th of 21)
a+ (5th of 21)
discover reinsurance company
a- (4th of 16)
afianzadora insurgentes, s.a.
a- (4th of 16)
st. paul guarantee insurance company
a (3rd of 16)
st. paul
travelers insurance company limited
a (3rd of 16)
(a) the st. paul travelers reinsurance pool
consists of: the travelers indemnity
company, the charter oak fire insurance company, the phoenix insurance company,
the travelers indemnity company of connecticut, the travelers indemnity company
of america, travelers property casualty company of america, travelers
commercial casualty company, travco insurance company, the travelers home and
marine insurance company, travelers casualty and surety company, the standard
fire insurance company, the automobile insurance company of hartford,
connecticut, travelers casualty insurance company of america, farmington
casualty company, travelers commercial insurance company, travelers casualty
company of connecticut, travelers property casualty insurance company,
travelers personal security insurance company, travelers personal insurance
company, travelers excess and surplus lines company, st. paul fire and marine
insurance company, st. paul surplus lines insurance company, athena assurance
company, st. paul protective insurance company, st. paul medical liability
insurance company, discover property & casualty insurance company, discover
specialty insurance company, and united states fidelity and guaranty company.
(b) the following affiliated companies are 100%
reinsured by one of the pool participants noted in (a) above: atlantic
insurance company, commercial guaranty lloyds insurance company, fidelity and
guaranty insurance company, fidelity and guaranty insurance underwriters, inc.,
gulf group lloyds, gulf underwriters insurance company, travelers auto
insurance co. of new jersey, seaboard surety company, select insurance company,
st. paul fire and casualty insurance company, st. paul guardian insurance
company, st. paul mercury insurance company, the travelers lloyds insurance
company, travelers lloyds of texas insurance company, and usf&g insurance
company of mississippi.
(c) the northland pool consists of northland
insurance company, northfield insurance company, northland casualty company,
mendota insurance company, mendakota insurance company, american equity
insurance company and american equity specialty insurance company.
debt ratings
the
following table summarizes the current debt, preferred stock and commercial
paper ratings of the company and its subsidiaries by a.m. best, moodys,
s&p and fitch as of february 27, 2006. the table also presents the position
of each rating in the applicable agencys rating scale.
a.m. best
moodys
s&p
fitch
senior debt
a- (7thof22)
a3(7thof21)
bbb+(8thof22)
a-(7thof22)
subordinated
debt
bbb+ (8thof 22)
baa (8thof 21)
bbb (9thof 22)
a- (7thof 22)
junior
subordinated debt
bbb+ (8thof 22)
baa (8thof 21)
bbb- (10thof 22)
bbb+ (8thof 22)
trust preferred
securities
bbb (9thof 22)
baa (8thof 21)
bbb- (10thof 22)
bbb+ (8thof 22)
preferred stock
bbb (9thof 22)
baa2 (9thof 21)
bbb- (10thof 22)
bbb+ (8thof 22)
commercial
paper.
amb-1 (2ndof 6)
prime-2 (2ndof 4)
a-2 (3rdof 8)
f-2 (3rdof 8)
investments
insurance
company investments must comply with applicable laws and regulations which prescribe
the kind, quality and concentration of investments. in general, these laws and
regulations permit investments in federal, state and municipal obligations,
corporate bonds, preferred and common equity securities, mortgage loans, real
estate and certain other investments, subject to specified limits and certain
other qualifications.
at
december 31, 2005, the carrying value of the companys investment portfolio was
$68.29 billion, of which 93% was invested in fixed maturity investments and
short-term investments (of which 60% was invested in federal, state or
municipal government obligations), 1% in mortgage loans and real estate, 1% in
equity securities and 5% in other investments. the average duration of the
fixed maturity portfolio, including short-term investments, was 3.9 years at
december 31, 2005. non-investment grade securities totaled approximately $1.75
billion, representing approximately 3% of the companys fixed maturity
investment portfolio as of december 31, 2005.
the
following table sets forth information regarding the companys investments. see
note 6 of notes to the companys consolidated financial statements for
additional information regarding the companys investment portfolio.
(for the year ended december 31, in millions)
average investments (a)
$
66,695
$
55,139
$
35,306
net investment income
$
3,165
$
2,663
$
1,869
average pretax yield (b)
4.7
%
4.8
%
5.3
%
average pretax equivalent yield (b)
5.6
%
5.6
%
6.2
%
average aftertax yield (b)
3.7
%
3.7
%
4.0
%
(a) reduced by payables for securities lending
and repurchase agreements, and adjusted for the impact of unrealized investment
gains and losses, receivables for investment sales and payables on investment
purchases.
(b) excluding net realized and unrealized
investment gains and losses.
derivatives
see
note 16 of notes to the companys consolidated financial statements for a
discussion of the policies and transactions related to the companys derivative
financial instruments.
competition
the
property and casualty insurance industry is highly competitive in the areas of
price, service, product offerings, agent relationships and method of
distribution, i.e., use of independent agents, exclusive agents and/or salaried
employees. according to a.m. best, there are approximately 975 property
casualty organizations in the united states, comprising approximately 2,400
property casualty companies. of those organizations, the top 150 accounted for
approximately 92% of the consolidated industrys total net written premiums in
2004. several property and casualty insurers writing commercial lines of
business, including the company, offer products for alternative forms of risk
protection in addition to traditional insurance products. these products, including
large deductible programs and various forms of self-insurance that utilize
captive insurance companies and risk retention groups, have been instituted in
reaction to the escalating cost of insurance caused in part by increased costs
from workers compensation cases and jury awards in third-party liability
cases.
commercial. the insurance industry is represented in the
commercial marketplace by many insurance companies of varying size as well as
other entities offering risk alternatives such as self-insured retentions or
captive programs. market competition works within the insurance regulatory
framework to set the price charged for insurance products and the level of
service provided. growth is driven by a companys ability to provide insurance
and services at a price that is reasonable and acceptable to the customer. in
addition, the marketplace is affected by available capacity of the insurance
industry, as measured by policyholders surplus, and the availability of
reinsurance. surplus expands and contracts primarily in conjunction with profit
levels generated by the industry. growth in premium and service business is
also measured by a companys ability to retain existing customers and to
attract new customers. additionally, many large commercial customers
self-insure their risks or utilize large deductibles on purchased insurance.
commercial accounts business has historically been
written through independent agents and brokers, although some companies use
direct writing. competitors in this market are primarily national property
casualty insurance companies willing to write most classes of business using
traditional products and pricing and, to a lesser extent, regional insurance
companies and companies that have developed niche programs for specific
industry segments. companies compete on price, product offerings, response time
in policy issuance and claim and loss prevention services. additionally,
improved efficiency through automation and response time to customer needs are
key to success in this market. commercial accounts also utilizes dedicated
units to tailor insurance programs to unique insurance needs. these units are
national property, transportation, boiler and machinery, inland marine,
agribusiness, excess and surplus and national programs.
select accounts business is typically written
through independent agents and, to a lesser extent, regional brokers. both
national and regional property casualty insurance companies compete in the
select accounts market which generally comprises lower hazard, main street
business customers. risks are underwritten and priced using standard industry
practices and a combination of proprietary and standard industry product
offerings. competition in this market is primarily based on price, product
offerings and response time in policy services. select accounts has established
a strong marketing relationship with its distribution network and has provided
it with defined underwriting policies, a broad array of products, competitive
prices and one of the most efficient automated environments in the industry. in
addition, the company has established centralized service centers to help
agents perform many service functions, in return for a fee. select accounts
overall service platform is one of the strongest in the small business
commercial market.
national accounts business is typically written
through national brokers and, to a lesser extent, regional brokers. insurance
companies compete in this market based on price, product offerings, claim and
loss prevention services, managed care cost containment and risk management
information systems. national accounts also offers a large nationwide network
of localized claim service centers which provide greater flexibility in claims
adjusting and allows national accounts to more quickly respond to the needs of
its customers. national accounts residual market business also competes for
state contracts to provide claims and policy management services. these
contracts, which generally have three-year terms, are selected by state
agencies through a bid process based on the quality of service and price. national
accounts services approximately 36% of the total workers compensation assigned
risk market, making the company one of the largest servicing insurers in the
industry.
discover re competes with traditional providers of
commercial insurance coverages, as well as other underwriters of property and
casualty insurance in the alternative risk transfer market that offer coverages
both on a bundled and unbundled basis, risk retention groups, self-insurance
plans, captives managed by others, and a variety of other risk-financing
vehicles and mechanisms.
the market in which gulf competed included small to
mid-size niche companies that target specific lines of insurance and larger,
multi-line companies that focus on various segments of the specialty accounts
market. prior to being placed in runoff in 2004, gulfs business was generally
written through retail and wholesale agents and brokers throughout the united
states.
specialty. the competitive landscape in which the
specialty segment operates is affected by many of the same factors described
previously for the commercial segment. the companys domestic and international
insurance subsidiaries compete with other stock companies, mutual companies,
alternative risk sharing groups and other underwriting organizations.
competitors in this market are primarily national property-casualty insurance
companies willing to write most classes of business using traditional products
and pricing and, to a lesser extent, regional insurance companies and companies
that have developed niche programs for specific industry segments. in addition,
many large commercial customers self-insure their risks or utilize large
deductibles on purchased insurance.
bond underwrites and markets its products to
national, mid-sized and small businesses and organizations as well as
individuals, and distributes them through both national and wholesale brokers,
and retail agents and regional brokers. bond competes in the highly competitive
surety and executive liability marketplaces. both national and regional
property casualty insurance companies compete with bond. bonds reputation for
timely and consistent decision-making, a nationwide network of local
underwriting, claims and industry experts and strong producer and customer
relationships as well as its ability to offer its customers a full range of
products, enable it to compete effectively. bonds ability to cross-sell its
products to customers of the commercial and personal segments provides further
competitive advantages for the company.
construction business has
historically been written through independent agents and brokers. competitors
in this industry include both national and regional property casualty insurance
companies. companies compete on price, coverage offerings, claim and loss
prevention services, managed care cost containment and risk management
information systems. construction offers a nationwide network of localized,
dedicated claim service professionals that provide greater flexibility in
claims adjusting and allows construction to more quickly respond to the needs
of its customers. in addition, dedicated risk control professionals work
directly with customers in the evaluation, design and implementation of safety
programs to better control risk and exposure to loss.
financial and professional services business is
typically written through national brokers, regional brokers, and independent
agents. insurance companies compete on price and product offerings. the company
has developed a strong reputation in this complex, dynamic market segment and
has an advantage over many of its competitors in offering a wide breadth of
professional and general property and casualty coverages to its financial and
professional customers.
there are several other domestic business groups in
specialty that compete in focused target markets. each of these markets are
different and require unique combinations of industry knowledge, proprietary
coverage forms, specialized risk control and loss handling services, and
partnerships with agents and brokers that also focus on these markets. in some
cases the competition is national carriers with similarly dedicated
underwriting and marketing groups. in other cases smaller regional companies
tend to be the primary competition. in either case these businesses have
regional structures that allow them to deliver personalized service and local
knowledge to their customer base. specialized agents and brokers supplement
this strategy. in all of these businesses, the competitive strategy is market
leadership attained through focused industry knowledge applied to insurance and
risk needs.
international specialty competes with numerous
international and local country insurers in the united kingdom, canada and the
republic of ireland. companies compete on the basis of price, product offerings
and the level of claim and risk management services provided. specialty has
developed expertise in various specialty markets in these countries similar to
those served in the united states and provides both property and casualty
coverage for these markets. this specialty focus is a particular competitive
advantage in these countries where our competitors have not developed expertise
in these specialty markets. products are
generally distributed through a fairly small number of local country brokers
whose customer groups align with the companys specialty markets.
at lloyds, international specialty competes with
other syndicates operating in the lloyds market as well as international and
domestic insurers in the various markets where international specialty writes
business worldwide. syndicates are increasingly capitalized by corporate
capital, much of which is provided by large international insurance
enterprises. competition is again based on price and product offerings.
international specialty has an exclusive focus on lines it believes it can
underwrite effectively and profitably with an emphasis on short-tail insurance primary
lines. specialty underwrites four major classes of business at lloyds: aviation,
marine, global property, and accident and special risks.
personal. personal lines insurance is written by
hundreds of insurance companies of varying sizes. although national companies
write the majority of the business, personal also faces competition from local
or regional companies which often have a competitive advantage because of their
knowledge of the local marketplace and their relationship with local agents.
personal believes that the principal competitive factors are price, service,
perceived stability of the insurer and name recognition. personal competes for
business within each independent agency since these agencies also offer
policies of competing companies. at the agency level, competition is primarily
based on price and the level of service, including claims handling, as well as
the level of automation and the development of long-term relationships with
individual agents. personal also competes with insurance companies that use
exclusive agents or salaried employees to sell their products. in addition to
its traditional independent agency distribution, personal has broadened its
distribution of products by marketing to sponsoring organizations, including
employee and affinity groups, and through joint marketing arrangements with
other insurers. personal believes that its continued focus on expense
management practices, underwriting and pricing segmentation, and claim
settlement effectiveness strategies enable personal to price its products
competitively in all of its distribution channels.
regulation
state regulation
the companys insurance subsidiaries are subject to
regulation in the various states and jurisdictions in which they transact
business. the extent of regulation varies, but generally derives from statutes
that delegate regulatory, supervisory and administrative authority to a
department of insurance in each state. the regulation, supervision and
administration relate, among other things, to standards of solvency that must
be met and maintained, the licensing of insurers and their agents, the nature
of and limitations on investments, premium rates, restrictions on the size of
risks that may be insured under a single policy, reserves and provisions for
unearned premiums, losses and other obligations, deposits of securities for the
benefit of policyholders, approval of policy forms and the regulation of market
conduct, including the use of credit information in underwriting as well as
other underwriting and claims practices. in addition, many states have enacted
variations of competitive rate-making laws, which allow insurers to set certain
premium rates for certain classes of insurance without having to obtain the prior
approval of the state insurance department. state insurance departments also
conduct periodic examinations of the affairs of insurance companies and require
the filing of annual and other reports relating to the financial condition of
companies and other matters. at the present time, the companys insurance
subsidiaries are collectively licensed to transact insurance business in all
states, the district of columbia, guam, puerto rico, bermuda, and the u.s.
virgin islands, as well as australia, canada, new zealand, the philippines, the
united kingdom, the republic of ireland, south africa and central and south
america.
as part of ongoing, industry-wide investigations,
the company and its affiliates have received subpoenas and written requests for
information from government agencies and authorities, including 18 states and
the sec. the areas of inquiry addressed to the company include its relationship
with brokers and agents, the companys involvement with non-traditional
insurance and reinsurance products, branding requirements for salvage
automobiles and the reporting of workers compensation premiums. the company is
cooperating with these subpoenas and requests for information. see parti
item 3  legal proceedings for further discussion.
insurance holding company statutes
as a holding company, the company is not regulated
as an insurance company. however, as the company owns capital stock in
insurance subsidiaries, it is subject to state insurance holding company
statutes, as well as certain other laws, of each of the states of domicile of
the companys insurance subsidiaries. all holding company statutes, as well as
other laws, require disclosure and, in some instances, prior approval of
material transactions between an insurance company and an affiliate. the
holding company statutes as well as other laws also require, among other
things, prior approval of an acquisition of control of a domestic insurer, some
transactions between affiliates and the payment of extraordinary dividends or distributions.
insurance regulation concerning
dividends
the companys principal insurance subsidiaries are
domiciled in the states of connecticut and minnesota. the insurance holding
company laws of both states applicable to the companys subsidiaries require
notice to, and approval by, the state insurance commissioner for the
declaration or payment of any dividend, that together with other distributions
made within the preceding twelve months, exceeds the greater of 10% of the
insurers capital and surplus as of the preceding december31, or the
insurers net income for the twelve-month period ending the preceding december31,
in each case determined in accordance with statutory accounting practices and
by state regulation. this declaration or payment is further limited by adjusted
unassigned surplus, as determined in accordance with statutory accounting
practices.
the insurance holding company laws of other states
in which the companys insurance subsidiaries are domiciled generally contain
similar, although in some instances somewhat more restrictive, limitations on
the payment of dividends.
assessments for guaranty funds and
second-injury funds and other mandatory pooling arrangements
virtually all states require insurers licensed to do
business in their state to bear a portion of the loss suffered by some insureds
as a result of the insolvency of other insurers. depending upon state law,
insurers can be assessed an amount that is generally equal to between 1% and 2%
of premiums written for the relevant lines of insurance in that state each year
to pay the claims of an insolvent insurer. partof these payments is
recoverable through future premium rates, premium tax credits or policy
surcharges. significant increases in assessments could limit the ability of the
companys insurance subsidiaries to recover such assessments through tax
credits or other means. in addition, there have been some legislative efforts
to limit or repeal the tax offset provisions, which efforts, to date, have been
generally unsuccessful. these
assessments leveled off in 2005 and in certain states began to decrease. these assessments may increase in the future
if additional insolvencies occur.
many states have laws that established second-injury
funds to provide compensation to injured employees for aggravation of a prior
condition or injury. insurers writing workers compensation in those states
having second-injury funds are subject to the laws creating the funds, including
the various funding mechanisms that those states have adopted to fund the
second-injury funds. several of the states having larger second-injury funds
utilize a premium surcharge that effectively passes the cost of the fund to
policyholders. other states assess the insurer based on paid losses and allow
the insurer to recoup the assessment through future premium rates.
the companys insurance subsidiaries are also
required to participate in various involuntary assigned risk pools, principally
involving workers compensation and automobile insurance, which provide various
insurance coverages to individuals or other entities that otherwise are unable
to purchase that coverage in the voluntary market. participation in these pools
in most states is generally in proportion to voluntary writings of related
lines of business in that state. in the event that a member of that pool
becomes insolvent, the remaining members assume an additional pro rata share of
the liabilities of the pool. the underwriting results of these pools
traditionally have been unprofitable. combined earned premiums related to such
pools and assigned risks for the company were $174 million, $168 million and $160
million in 2005, 2004 and 2003, respectively. the related combined underwriting
losses for the company were $112 million, $71 million and $111 million in 2005,
2004 and 2003, respectively.
proposed legislation and regulatory changes have
been introduced in the states from time to time that would modify some of the
laws and regulations affecting the financial services industry, including the
use of information. the potential impact of that legislation on the companys
businesses cannot be predicted at this time.
insurance regulations concerning
change of control
many state insurance regulatory laws intended
primarily for the protection of policyholders contain provisions that require
advance approval by state agencies of any change in control of an insurance
company that is domiciled, or, in some cases, having substantial business that
it is deemed to be commercially domiciled, in that state. the company owns,
directly or indirectly, all of the shares of stock of property and casualty
insurance companies domiciled in the states of arizona, california,
connecticut, delaware, florida, illinois, indiana, iowa, maryland,
massachusetts, minnesota, mississippi, new jersey, new york, texas and
wisconsin. control is generally presumed to exist through the ownership of
10% (5% in the case of florida) or more of the voting securities of a domestic
insurance company or of any company that controls a domestic insurance company.
any purchaser of shares of common stock representing 10% (5% in the case of
florida) or more of the voting power of the companys capital stock will be
presumed to have acquired control of the companys domestic insurance
subsidiaries unless, following application by that purchaser in each insurance
subsidiarys state of domicile, the relevant insurance commissioner determines
otherwise.
in addition to these filings, the laws of many
states contain provisions requiring pre-notification to state agencies prior to
any change in control of a non-domestic insurance company admitted to transact
business in that state. while these pre-notification statutes do not authorize
the state agency to disapprove the change of control, they do authorize
issuance of cease and desist orders with respect to the non-domestic insurer if
it is determined that some conditions, such as undue market concentration,
would result from the acquisition.
any transactions that would constitute a change in
control of any of the companys insurer subsidiaries would generally require
prior approval by the insurance departments of the states in which the companys
insurance subsidiaries are domiciled or commercially domiciled and may require
preacquisition notification in those states that have adopted preacquisition
notification provisions and in which such insurance subsidiaries are admitted
to transact business.
one of the companys insurance subsidiaries and the
companys operations at lloyds are domiciled in the united kingdom. insurers
in the united kingdom are subject to change of control restrictions in the
financial services and markets act of 2000 including approval of the financial
services authority. insurers in the republic of ireland are subject to
regulation by the irish financial services regulatory authority.
some of the companys other insurance subsidiaries
are domiciled in, or authorized to conduct insurance business in, canada. authorized
insurers in canada are subject to change of control restrictions in section407
of the insurance companies act, including approval of the office of the
superintendent of financial institutions.
these requirements may deter, delay or prevent
transactions affecting the control of or the ownership of common stock,
including transactions that could be advantageous to the companys
shareholders.
insurance regulatory information
system
the national association of insurance commissioners
(naic) insurance regulatory information system (iris) was developed to help
state regulators identify companies that may require special attention. the
iris system consists of a statistical phase and an analytical phase whereby
financial examiners review annual statements and financial ratios. the
statistical phase consists of twelve key financial ratios based on year-end
data that are generated from the naic database annually, and each ratio has an
established usual range of results. these ratios assist state insurance
departments in executing their statutory mandate to oversee the financial
condition of insurance companies.
a ratio result falling outside the usual range of
iris ratios is not considered a failing result; rather, unusual values are
viewed as part of the regulatory early monitoring system. furthermore, in some
years, it may not be unusual for financially sound companies to have several
ratios with results outside the usual ranges. generally, an insurance company
will become subject to regulatory scrutiny if it falls outside the usual ranges
of four or more of the ratios.
based on preliminary 2005 iris ratios calculated by
the company, most of the companys insurance subsidiaries in the st. paul
travelers reinsurance pool had results outside the usual range for the two-year
reserve development ratio, with ratios ranging from 20% to 39% (versus the
usual value of less than 20%), due to reserve strengthening actions that
occurred in 2004 and the combining of the two pools that occurred in 2005. in
addition, discover reinsurance company had results outside the normal range for
the one-year and two-year reserve development ratios, with ratios of 32% and
116%, respectively, compared to the usual value of less than 20%, due to
reserve strengthening actions in 2005 and 2004. discover reinsurance company
also had a result outside the normal range for the two-year operating ratio
(128% versus the usual value of less than 100%) due to the same reserve
strengthening actions.
in 2004, most of the companys insurance
subsidiaries in the travelers property casualty pool had iris ratio results
outside the usual range for the estimated current reserve deficiency to surplus
ratio, with ratios ranging from 26% to 37% above the usual value of less than
25%, due to the lags in the ratios ability to reflect changes in business
volume and business mix. also in 2004, st. paul fire and marine insurance
company, united states fidelity and guaranty company, discover reinsurance company
and most of the st. paul fire and marine pool members had unusual values in the
one-year and two-year reserve development ratios above the usual values of less
than 20%, due to reserve strengthening actions that occurred in 2003 and 2004.
those one-year and two-year reserve development ratios for st. paul fire and
marine insurance company were 24% and 40%, for united states fidelity and
guaranty company the ratios were 78% and 29%, and for discover reinsurance
company the ratios were 64% and 151%. the one-year and two-year reserve
development ratios for the st. paul fire and marine pool members with unusual
values ranged from 22% to 45% and 40% to 93% respectively. united states
fidelity and guaranty company and discover reinsurance company had two-year
operating ratios of 159% and 108%, respectively, compared to the usual value of
less than 100%, due to the 2004 reserve strengthening actions. united states
fidelity and guaranty company and discover reinsurance company also had change
in surplus ratios of 63% and 78%, respectively, compared to a usual value of
less than 50%, due to 2004 capital contributions from their parent companies.
discover reinsurance company also had a surplus aid to surplus ratio of 17%
compared to the usual value of less than 15%.
management does not anticipate regulatory action as
a result of the 2005 iris ratio results. in all of these instances in prior
years, regulators have been satisfied upon follow-up that no regulatory action
was required. it is possible that similar results could occur in the future. no
regulatory action has been taken by any state insurance department or the naic
with respect to iris ratios of any of the companys insurance subsidiaries for
the year ended december31, 2004.
risk-based capital (rbc)
requirements
in order to enhance the regulation of insurer
solvency, the naic has adopted a formula and model law to implement rbc
requirements for most property and casualty insurance companies, which is
designed to determine minimum capital requirements and to raise the level of
protection that statutory surplus provides for policyholder obligations. the
rbc formula for property and casualty insurance companies measures three major
areas of risk facing property and casualty insurers:
underwriting, which encompasses the risk of
adverse loss developments and inadequate pricing;
declines in asset values arising from market
and/or credit risk; and
off-balance sheet risk arising from adverse
experience from non-controlled assets, guarantees for affiliates or other
contingent liabilities and reserve and premium growth.
under laws adopted by individual states, insurers
having total adjusted capital less than that required by the rbc calculation
will be subject to varying degrees of regulatory action, depending on the level
of capital inadequacy.
the rbc law provides for four levels of regulatory
action. the extent of regulatory intervention and action increases as the level
of surplus to rbc falls. the first level, the company action level as defined
by the naic, requires an insurer to submit a plan of corrective actions to the
regulator if surplus falls below 200% of the rbc amount. the regulatory action
level, as defined by the naic, requires an insurer to submit a plan containing
corrective actions and requires the relevant insurance commissioner to perform
an examination or other analysis and issue a corrective order if surplus falls
below 150% of the rbc amount. the authorized control level, as defined by the
naic, authorizes the relevant insurance commissioner to take whatever
regulatory actions considered necessary to protect the best interest of the
policyholders and creditors of the insurer which may include the actions
necessary to cause the insurer to be placed under regulatory control, i.e.,
rehabilitation or liquidation, if surplus falls below 100% of the rbc amount.
the fourth action level is the mandatory control level as defined by the naic,
which requires the relevant insurance commissioner to place the insurer under
regulatory control if surplus falls below 70% of the rbc amount.
the formulas have not been designed to differentiate
among adequately capitalized companies that operate with higher levels of
capital. therefore, it is inappropriate and ineffective to use the formulas to
rate or to rank these companies. at december31, 2005, all of the companys
property and casualty insurance subsidiaries had total adjusted capital in
excess of amounts requiring company or regulatory action at any prescribed rbc
action level.
other information
general business factors
in the opinion of the companys management, no
material part of the business of the company and its subsidiaries is dependent
upon a single customer or group of customers, the loss of any one of which
would have a materially adverse effect on the company, and no one customer or
group of affiliated customers accounts for as much as 10% of the companys
consolidated revenues.
employees
at december31, 2005, the company had approximately
31,900 employees. the company believes that its employee relations are
satisfactory. none of the companys employees are subject to collective
bargaining agreements.
source of funds
for a discussion of the companys sources of funds and
maturities of the long-term debt of the company, see item 7, managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of
operationsliquidity and capital resources, and note 10 of notes to the
companys consolidated financial statements.
taxation
for a discussion of tax matters affecting the
company and its operations, see note 11 of notes to the companys consolidated
financial statements.
financial information about
industry segments
for financial information regarding industry
segments of the company, see item 7, managements discussion and analysis of
financial condition and results of operations, and note 5 of notes to the
companys consolidated financial statements.
recent transactions
for information regarding recent transactions of the
company, see item 7, managements discussion and analysis of financial
condition and results of operations, and note 1 of notes to the companys
consolidated financial statements.
company website and availability of
sec filings
the companys internet website is www.stpaultravelers.com. information on
the companys website is not a part of this form10-k. the company makes
available free of charge on its website or provides a link on its website to
the companys annual report on form10-k, quarterly reports on form10-q
and current reports on form8-k, and any amendments to those reports filed
or furnished pursuant to section13(a)or 15(d)of the
securities exchange act of 1934, as soon as reasonably practicable after those
reports are electronically filed with, or furnished to, the sec. to access
these filings, go to the companys website, then click on sec filings under
the investors heading.
glossary of
selected insurance terms
accident year
the annual calendar accounting period in which
loss events occurred, regardless of when the losses are actually reported,
booked or paid.
adjusted unassigned surplus
unassigned surplus as of the most recent statutory
annual report reduced by twenty-five percent of that years unrealized
appreciation in value or revaluation of assets or unrealized profits on
investments, as defined in that report.
admitted insurer
a company licensed to transact insurance business
within a state.
annuity
a contract that pays a periodic benefit over the
remaining life of a person (the annuitant), the lives of two or more persons
or for a specified period of time.
assigned risk pools
reinsurance pools which cover risks for those
unable to purchase insurance in the voluntary market. possible reasons for
this inability include the risk being too great or the profit being too small
under the required insurance rate structure. the costs of the risks
associated with these pools are charged back to insurance carriers in
proportion to their direct writings.
assumed reinsurance
insurance risks acquired from a ceding company.
broker
one who negotiates contracts of insurance or reinsurance
on behalf of an insured party, receiving a commission from the insurer or
reinsurer for placement and other services rendered.
capacity
the percentage of surplus, or the dollar amount of
exposure, that an insurer or reinsurer is willing or able to place at risk.
capacity may apply to a single risk, a program, a line of business or an
entire book of business. capacity may be constrained by legal restrictions,
corporate restrictions or indirect restrictions.
case reserves
claim department estimates of anticipated future
payments to be made on each specific individual reported claim.
casualty insurance
insurance which is primarily concerned with the
losses caused by injuries to third persons, i.e., not the insured, and the
legal liability imposed on the insured resulting therefrom. it includes, but
is not limited to, employers liability, workers compensation, public
liability, automobile liability, personal liability and aviation liability
insurance. it excludes certain types of losses that by law or custom are
considered as being exclusively within the scope of other types of insurance,
such as fire or marine.
catastrophe
a severe loss, resulting from natural and manmade
events, including risks such as fire, earthquake, windstorm, explosion,
terrorism and other similar events. each catastrophe has unique
characteristics. catastrophes are not predictable as to timing or amount in
advance, and therefore their effects are not included in earnings or claims
and claim adjustment expense reserves prior to occurrence. a catastrophe may
also result in the payment of reinstatement premiums and assessments from
various pools.
catastrophe loss
loss and directly identified loss adjustment
expenses from catastrophes.
catastrophe reinsurance
a form of excess of loss reinsurance which,
subject to a specified limit, indemnifies the ceding company for the amount
of loss in excess of a specified retention with respect to an accumulation of
losses resulting from a catastrophic event. the actual reinsurance document
is called a catastrophe cover. these reinsurance contracts are typically
designed to cover property insurance losses but can be written to cover
casualty insurance losses such as from workers compensation policies.
cede; ceding company
when an insurer reinsures its liability with
another insurer or a cession, it cedes business and is referred to as the
ceding company.
ceded reinsurance
insurance risks transferred to another company as
reinsurance. see reinsurance.
claim
request by an insured for indemnification by an
insurance company for loss incurred from an insured peril.
claim adjustment expenses
see loss adjustment expenses (lae).
claims and claim adjustment expenses
see loss and loss adjustment expenses.
claims and claim adjustment expense reserves
see loss reserves.
combined ratio
the sum of the loss and lae ratio, the
underwriting expense ratio and, where applicable, the ratio of dividends to
policyholders to net premiums earned. a combined ratio under 100% generally
indicates an underwriting profit. a combined ratio over 100% generally
indicates an underwriting loss.
commercial lines
the various kinds of property and casualty
insurance that are written for businesses.
commercial multi-peril policies
refers to policies which cover both property and
third-party liability exposures.
commutation agreement
an agreement between a reinsurer and a ceding company
whereby the reinsurer pays an agreed upon amount in exchange for a complete
discharge of all obligations, including future obligations, between the
parties for reinsurance losses incurred.
deductible
the amount of loss that an insured retains.
deferred acquisition costs
primarily commissions and premium-related taxes
that vary with and are primarily related to the production of new contracts
and are deferred and amortized to achieve a matching of revenues and expenses
when reported in financial statements prepared in accordance with generally
accepted accounting principles (gaap).
direct written premiums
the amounts charged by an insurer to insureds in
exchange for coverages provided in accordance with the terms of an insurance
contract. the amounts exclude the impact of all reinsurance premiums, either
assumed or ceded.
earned premiums or premiums earned
that portion of property casualty premiums written
that applies to the expired portion of the policy term. earned premiums are recognized
as revenues under both statutory accounting practices (sap) and gaap.
excess liability
additional casualty coverage above a layer of
insurance exposures.
excess of loss reinsurance
reinsurance that indemnifies the reinsured against
all or a specified portion of losses over a specified dollar amount or retention.
expense ratio
see underwriting expense ratio.
facultative reinsurance
the reinsurance of all or a portion of the
insurance provided by a single policy. each policy reinsured is separately
negotiated.
fidelity and surety programs
fidelity insurance coverage protects an insured
for loss due to embezzlement or misappropriation of funds by an employee.
surety is a three-party agreement in which the insurer agrees to pay a second
party or make complete an obligation in response to the default, acts or
omissions of an insured.
guaranteed cost products
an insurance policy where the premiums charged
will not be adjusted for actual loss experience during the covered period.
guaranty fund
state-regulated mechanism which is financed by
assessing insurers doing business in those states. should insolvencies occur,
these funds are available to meet some or all of the insolvent insurers
obligations to policyholders.
incurred but not reported (ibnr) reserves
reserves for estimated losses and lae that have
been incurred but not yet reported to the insurer. this includes amounts for
unreported claims, development on known cases, and re-opened claims.
inland marine
a broad type of insurance generally covering
articles that may be transported from one place to another, as well as
bridges, tunnels and other instrumentalities of transportation. it includes
goods in transit, generally other than transoceanic, and may include policies
for movable objects such as personal effects, personal property, jewelry,
furs, fine art and others.
iris ratios
financial ratios calculated by the naic to assist
state insurance departments in monitoring the financial condition of
insurance companies.
large deductible policy
an insurance policy where the customer assumes at
least $25,000 or more of each loss. typically, the insurer is responsible for
paying the entire loss under those policies and then seeks reimbursement from
the insured for the deductible amount.
lloyds
an insurance marketplace based in london, england,
where brokers, representing clients with insurable risks, deal with lloyds
underwriters, who represent investors. the investors are grouped together
into syndicates that provide capital to insure the risks.
loss
an occurrence that is the basis for submission
and/or payment of a claim. losses may be covered, limited or excluded from
coverage, depending on the terms of the policy.
loss adjustment expenses (lae)
the expenses of settling claims, including legal
and other fees and the portion of general expenses allocated to claim
settlement costs.
loss and lae ratio
for sap, it is the ratio of incurred losses and
loss adjustment expenses to net earned premiums. for gaap, it is the ratio of
incurred losses and loss adjustment expenses reduced by an allocation of fee
income to net earned premiums.
loss reserves
liabilities established by insurers and reinsurers
to reflect the estimated cost of claims incurred that the insurer or
reinsurer will ultimately be required to pay in respect of insurance or
reinsurance it has written. reserves are established for losses and for lae,
and consist of case reserves and ibnr reserves. as the term is used in this
document, loss reserves is meant to include reserves for both losses and
lae.
loss reserve development
the increase or decrease in incurred claims and
claim adjustment expenses as a result of the re-estimation of claims and
claim adjustment expense reserves at successive valuation dates for a given
group of claims. loss reserve development may be related to prior year or
current year development.
losses incurred
the total losses sustained by an insurance company
under a policy or policies, whether paid or unpaid. incurred losses include a
provision for ibnr.
national association of insurance commissioners
(naic)
an organization of the insurance commissioners or
directors of all 50 states and the district of columbia organized to promote
consistency of regulatory practice and statutory accounting standards
throughout the united states.
net written premiums
direct written premiums plus assumed reinsurance
premiums less premiums ceded to reinsurers.
operating income (loss)
net income (loss) excluding the after-tax impact
of net realized investment gains (losses), discontinued operations and
cumulative effect of changes in accounting principles when applicable.
operating income (loss) per share
operating income (loss) on a per share basis.
operating return on equity
the ratio of operating income to average equity
excluding net unrealized investment gains and losses and discontinued
operations, net of tax.
personal lines
the various kinds of property and casualty
insurance that are written for individuals or families.
pool
an organization of insurers or reinsurers through
which particular types of risks are underwritten with premiums, losses and
expenses being shared in agreed-upon percentages.
premiums
the amount charged during the year on policies and
contracts issued, renewed or reinsured by an insurance company.
producer
contractual entity which directs insureds to the
insurer for coverage. this term includes agents and brokers.
property insurance
insurance that provides coverage to a person or
business with an insurable interest in tangible property for that persons or
businesss property loss, damage or loss of use.
quota share reinsurance
reinsurance wherein the insurer cedes an
agreed-upon fixed percentage of liabilities, premiums and losses for each
policy covered on a pro rata basis.
rates
amounts charged per unit of insurance.
reinstatement premiums
additional premiums payable to reinsurers to
restore coverage limits that have been exhausted as a result of reinsured
losses under certain excess of loss reinsurance treaties.
reinsurance
the practice whereby one insurer, called the
reinsurer, in consideration of a premium paid to that insurer, agrees to
indemnify another insurer, called the ceding company, for part or all of the
liability of the ceding company under one or more policies or contracts of
insurance which it has issued.
reinsurance agreement
a contract specifying the terms of a reinsurance
transaction.
residual market (involuntary business)
insurance market which provides coverage for risks
for those unable to purchase insurance in the voluntary market. possible
reasons for this inability include the risk being too great or the profit
potential too small under the required insurance rate structure. residual
markets are frequently created by state legislation either because of lack of
available coverage such as: property coverage in a windstorm prone area or
protection of the accident victim as in the case of workers compensation.
the costs of the residual market are usually charged back to the direct
insurance carriers in proportion to the carriers voluntary market shares for
the type of coverage involved.
retention
the amount of exposure a policyholder company
retains on any one risk or group of risks. the term may apply to an insurance
policy, where the policyholder is an individual, family or business, or a
reinsurance policy, where the policyholder is an insurance company.
retention ratio
current period renewal accounts or policies as a
percentage of total accounts or policies available for renewal.
retrospective premiums
premiums related to retrospectively rated
policies.
retrospective rating
a plan or method which permits adjustment of the
final premium or commission on the basis of actual loss experience, subject
to certain minimum and maximum limits.
return on equity
the ratio of net income to average equity.
risk-based capital (rbc)
a measure adopted by the naic and enacted by
states for determining the minimum statutory capital and surplus requirements
of insurers. insurers having total adjusted capital less than that required
by the rbc calculation will be subject to varying degrees of regulatory
action depending on the level of capital inadequacy.
risk retention group
an alternative form of insurance in which members
of a similar profession or business band together to self insure their risks.
run-off business
an operation which has been determined to be
nonstrategic; includes non-renewals of inforce policies and a cessation of
writing new business, where allowed by law.
salvage
the amount of money an insurer recovers through
the sale of property transferred to the insurer as a result of a loss
payment.
second-injury fund
the employer of an injured, impaired worker is
responsible only for the workers compensation benefit for the most recent
injury; the second-injury fund would cover the cost of any additional
benefits for aggravation of a prior condition. the cost is shared by the
insurance industry and self-insureds, funded through assessments to insurance
companies and self-insureds based on either premiums or losses.
self-insured retentions
that portion of the risk retained by a person for
its own account.
servicing carrier
an insurance company that provides, for a fee,
various services including policy issuance, claims adjusting and customer
service for insureds in a reinsurance pool.
specialty lines
the various kinds of specialized property and casualty
insurance that are written for businesses and professionals.
statutory accounting practices (sap)
the practices and procedures prescribed or
permitted by domiciliary state insurance regulatory authorities in the united
states for recording transactions and preparing financial statements.
statutory accounting practices generally reflect a modified going concern
basis of accounting.
statutory surplus
as determined under sap, the amount remaining
after all liabilities, including loss reserves, are subtracted from all
admitted assets. admitted assets are assets of an insurer prescribed or
permitted by a state to be recognized on the statutory balance sheet.
statutory surplus is also referred to as surplus or surplus as regards
policyholders for statutory accounting purposes.
structured settlements
periodic payments to an injured person or survivor
for a determined number of years or for life, typically in settlement of a
claim under a liability policy, usually funded through the purchase of an
annuity.
subrogation
a principle of law incorporated in insurance
policies, which enables an insurance company, after paying a claim under a
policy, to recover the amount of the loss from another who is legally liable
for it.
third-party liability
a liability owed to a claimant (third party) who
is not one of the two parties to the insurance contract. insured liability
claims are referred to as third-party claims.
treaty reinsurance
the reinsurance of a specified type or category of
risks defined in a reinsurance agreement (a treaty) between a primary
insurer or other reinsured and a reinsurer. typically, in treaty reinsurance,
the primary insurer or reinsured is obligated to offer and the reinsurer is
obligated to accept a specified portion of all that type or category of risks
originally written by the primary insurer or reinsured.
umbrella coverage
a form of insurance protection against losses in
excess of amounts covered by other liability insurance policies or amounts
not covered by the usual liability policies.
unassigned surplus
the undistributed and unappropriated amount of
statutory surplus.
underwriter
an employee of an insurance company who examines,
accepts or rejects risks and classifies accepted risks in order to charge an
appropriate premium for each accepted risk. the underwriter is expected to
select business that will produce an average risk of loss no greater than
that anticipated for the class of business.
underwriting
the insurers or reinsurers process of reviewing
applications for insurance coverage, and the decision whether to accept all
or part of the coverage and determination of the applicable premiums; also
refers to the acceptance of that coverage.
underwriting expense ratio
for sap, it is the ratio of underwriting expenses
incurred less other income to net written premiums. for gaap, it is the ratio
of underwriting expenses incurred reduced by an allocation of fee income and
billing and policy fees to net earned premiums.
underwriting gain or loss
net earned premiums and fee income less claims and
claim adjustment expenses and insurance-related expenses.
unearned premium
the portion of premiums written that is allocable
to the unexpired portion of the policy term.
voluntary market
the market in which a person seeking insurance
obtains coverage without the assistance of residual market mechanisms.
wholesale broker
an independent or exclusive agent that represents
both admitted and nonadmitted insurers in market areas, which include
standard, non-standard, specialty and excess and surplus lines of insurance.
the wholesaler does not deal directly with the insurance consumer. the
wholesaler deals with the retail agent or broker.
workers compensation
a system (established under state and federal
laws) under which employers provide insurance for benefit payments to their
employees for work-related injuries, deaths and diseases, regardless of
fault.
item 1a. risk factors
you should carefully
consider the following risks and all of the other information set forth in this
report, including our consolidated financial statements and the notes
thereto.
catastrophe losses could materially
reduce our profitability and adversely impact our ratings, our ability to raise
capital and the availability and cost of reinsurance. our
property and casualty insurance operations expose us to claims arising out of
catastrophes. catastrophes can be caused by various natural events, including
hurricanes, windstorms, earthquakes, hail, severe winter weather and fires.
catastrophes can also be man-made, such as a terrorist attack (including those
involving nuclear, biological, chemical or radiological events) or a consequence
of war or political instability. the geographic distribution of our business
subjects us to catastrophe exposure from hurricanes in the northeast, florida,
gulf coast and mid-atlantic regions, as well as catastrophe exposure from
earthquakes in california and the new madrid and pacific northwest regions and
other weather-related catastrophe exposure in the united kingdom. the incidence and severity of catastrophes
are inherently unpredictable. over the last several years, changing climactic
conditions have added to the unpredictability and frequency of natural
disasters in certain parts of the world and created additional uncertainty as
to future trends and exposures. it is
possible that both the frequency and severity of natural and man-made
catastrophic events will increase. in
particular, we expect that the trend of increased severity and frequency of storms experienced
in 2005 and 2004 will continue into 2006.
the extent of losses from a catastrophe is a function of both the total
amount of insured exposure in the area affected by the event and the severity
of the event. states have from time to time passed legislation that has the
effect of limiting the ability of insurers to manage catastrophe risk, such as
legislation prohibiting insurers from withdrawing from catastrophe-prone areas.
in addition, following catastrophes, there are sometimes legislative
initiatives and court decisions which seek to expand insurance coverage for
catastrophe claims beyond the original intent of the policies. also, our ability to increase pricing to the
extent necessary to offset rising costs of catastrophes, particularly in the
personal segment, requires approval of regulatory authorities of certain
states.
catastrophe losses could materially and adversely affect our financial
results for any fiscal quarter or year and may materially reduce our
profitability or harm our financial condition, which in turn could adversely
affect our financial strength and claims-paying ratings and could impair our
ability to raise capital on acceptable terms or at all. also, particularly in light of the frequency
and severity of storms in the past two years, rating agencies may increase
their capital requirements, which may require us to raise capital to maintain
our ratings or adversely affect our ratings. in addition, catastrophic events could
cause us to exhaust our available reinsurance limits and could adversely impact the cost and availability of
reinsurance. we
have limited terrorism coverage in our reinsurance program, and although the
terrorism risk insurance extension act of 2005 provides benefits in the event
of certain acts of terrorism, it may not be extended beyond 2007 or its
benefits may be reduced.
our business could be harmed because of our potential exposure to asbestos and
environmental claims
and related litigation.
asbestos claims. we believe that the property and
casualty insurance industry has suffered from court decisions and other trends
that have attempted to expand insurance coverage for asbestos claims far beyond
the intent of insurers and policyholders.
as a result, we continue to experience a significant number of asbestos
claims being tendered to us by our policyholders (which includes others seeking
coverage under a policy) including claims against our policyholders by
individuals who do not appear to be impaired by asbestos exposure. factors underlying these claim filings
include intensive advertising by lawyers seeking asbestos claimants, the focus
by plaintiffs on new and previously peripheral defendants and entities seeking
bankruptcy protection as a result of asbestos-related liabilities. in addition to contributing to the overall
number of claims, bankruptcy proceedings may increase asbestos-related
losses by initially delaying the reporting of claims and later by significantly
accelerating and increasing loss payments by insurers, including us. bankruptcy proceedings are also causing
increased settlement demands against those policyholders who are not in
bankruptcy but that remain in the tort system.
in addition, our asbestos-related loss and loss expense experience is
impacted by the exhaustion or unavailability due to insolvency of other
insurance sources potentially available to policyholders along with the
insolvency or bankruptcy of other defendants.
we are currently involved in coverage litigation concerning a number of
policyholders who have filed for bankruptcy, including, among others, acands, inc.,
who in some instances have asserted that all or a portion of their
asbestos-related claims are not subject to aggregate limits on coverage as
described generally in the next paragraph. also see part i  item 3  legal
proceedings. these trends are expected to continue in the near term. as a result of the factors described above,
there is a high degree of uncertainty with respect to future exposure from
asbestos claims.
in some
instances, policyholders continue to assert that their claims for
asbestos-related insurance are not subject to aggregate limits on coverage and
that each individual bodily injury claim should be treated as a separate
occurrence under the policy. it is
difficult to predict whether these policyholders will be successful on both
issues or whether we will be successful in asserting additional defenses. to the extent both issues are resolved in
policyholders favor and other additional company defenses are not successful,
our coverage obligations under the policies at issue would be materially
increased and bounded only by the applicable per-occurrence limits and the
number of asbestos bodily injury claims against the policyholders. accordingly, it is difficult to predict the
ultimate cost of the claims for coverage not subject to aggregate limits.
many coverage
disputes with policyholders are only resolved through settlement
agreements. because many policyholders
make exaggerated demands, it is difficult to predict the outcome of settlement
negotiations. settlements involving
bankrupt policyholders may include extensive releases which are favorable to us
but which could result in settlements for larger amounts than originally
anticipated. also, courts may not approve proposed settlements,
which would result in additional litigation and potentially less beneficial outcomes
for us. as in the past, we will continue
to pursue settlement opportunities.
in addition,
proceedings have been launched directly against insurers, including us,
challenging insurers conduct in respect of asbestos claims, and claims by
individuals seeking damages arising from alleged asbestos-related bodily
injuries. there
may be additional filings of other direct actions
against insurers, including us, in the future. it is difficult to predict the outcome of
these proceedings, including whether the plaintiffs will be able to sustain
these actions against insurers based on novel legal theories of liability.
environmental claims. we continue to receive claims from
policyholders who allege that they are liable for injury or damage arising out of
their alleged disposition of toxic substances. mostly, these claims are due to
various legislative as well as regulatory efforts aimed at environmental
remediation. for instance, the comprehensive environmental response,
compensation and liability act (cercla), enacted in 1980 and later modified,
enables private parties as well as federal and state governments to take action
with respect to releases and threatened releases of hazardous substances. this
federal statute permits the recovery of response costs from some liable parties
and may require liable parties to undertake their own remedial action.
liability under cercla may be joint and several with other responsible parties.
we have been,
and continue to be, involved in litigation involving insurance coverage issues
pertaining to environmental claims. we believe that some court decisions have
interpreted the insurance coverage to be broader than the original intent of
the insurers and policyholders. these decisions often pertain to insurance
policies that were issued by us prior to the mid-1970s. these decisions
continue to be inconsistent and vary from jurisdiction to jurisdiction.
environmental claims when submitted rarely indicate the monetary amount being
sought by the claimant from the policyholder, and we do not keep track of the
monetary amount being sought in those few claims which indicate a monetary
amount.
asbestos and environmental claims. it is
difficult to determine the ultimate exposure for asbestos and environmental
claims and
related litigation. as
a result, these reserves are subject to revision as new information becomes
available and as claims develop. the continuing
uncertainties include, without limitation, the risks and lack of predictability
inherent in complex litigation, any impact from
the bankruptcy protection sought by various asbestos producers and other
asbestos defendants, a further increase or decrease in asbestos and environmental claims which cannot now be anticipated, the
role of any umbrella or excess policies we have issued, the resolution or adjudication of some disputes
pertaining to the amount of available coverage for asbestos and environmental claims in a manner inconsistent with
our previous
assessment of these claims, the number and outcome of direct actions against
us
and future developments pertaining to our ability to
recover reinsurance for asbestos and
environmental claims. in addition, our asbestos-related loss and loss expense
experience has been impacted by the exhaustion
or unavailability due to insolvency of other insurance sources potentially
available to policyholders along with the insolvency or bankruptcy of other
defendants. it is also not possible to predict changes in the legal
and legislative environment and their impact on the future development of asbestos and environmental claims. this
development will be affected by future court decisions and interpretations, as
well as changes in applicable legislation, including proposed legislation related
to asbestos reform. it is also difficult to predict the ultimate
outcome of large coverage disputes until settlement negotiations near
completion and significant legal questions are resolved or, failing settlement,
until the dispute is adjudicated. this is particularly the
case with policyholders in bankruptcy where negotiations often involve a large
number of claimants and other parties and require court approval to be
effective. see the asbestos claims and litigation and environmental claims
and litigation sections of managements discussion and analysis of financial
condition and results of operations. also see part i  item 3,
legal proceedings.
because of the uncertainties set forth above,
additional liabilities may arise for amounts in excess of the current reserves for asbestos and environmental claims. in addition, our estimate of claims and claim
adjustment expenses may change. these
additional liabilities or increases in estimates, or a range of either, cannot
now be reasonably estimated and could result in income statement charges that
could be material to our operating results and financial condition in future
periods.
reinsurance may not protect us against losses. we
use reinsurance to help manage our exposure to property and casualty risks. the
availability and cost of reinsurance are subject to prevailing market
conditions, both in terms of price and available capacity, which can affect our
business volume and profitability. although the reinsurer is liable to us to
the extent of the ceded reinsurance, we remain liable as the direct insurer on
all risks reinsured. as a result, ceded reinsurance arrangements do not
eliminate our obligation to pay claims. accordingly, we are subject to credit
risk with respect to our ability to recover amounts due from reinsurers. in
addition, some of our reinsurance claims may be disputed by the reinsurers, and
we may ultimately receive partial or no payment. this is a particular risk in
the case of claims that relate to insurance policies written many years ago,
including those relating to asbestos and environmental claims. reinsurance may
not protect us against losses and may not be available to us in the future at
commercially reasonable rates or at all.
we are exposed to, and may face adverse
developments involving, mass tort claims such as those relating to exposure to
potentially harmful products or substances.
in
addition to asbestos and environmental pollution, we face exposure to other
types of mass tort claims, including claims related to exposure to potentially
harmful products or substances, including lead paint, silica and welding rod
fumes. establishing claim and claim
adjustment expense reserves for mass tort claims is subject to uncertainties
because of many factors, including expanded theories of liability, disputes
concerning medical causation with respect to certain diseases, geographical
concentration of the lawsuits asserting the claims and the large rise in the
total number of claims without underlying epidemiological developments
suggesting an increase in disease rates. moreover, evolving judicial
interpretations regarding the application of various tort theories and
defenses, including application of various theories of joint and several
liabilities, as well as the application of insurance coverage to these claims,
impede our ability to estimate our ultimate liability for such claims.
because of
the uncertainties set forth above, additional liabilities may arise for amounts
in excess of the current related reserves. in addition, our estimate of
claims and claim adjustment expenses may change. these additional
liabilities or increases in estimates, or a range of either, cannot now be
reasonably estimated and could result in income statement charges that could be
material to our operating results in future periods.
if actual claims exceed
our loss reserves, or if changes in the estimated level of loss reserves are
necessary, our financial results could be significantly and adversely affected.
claim and claim adjustment expense reserves (loss reserves) represent
managements estimate of ultimate unpaid costs of losses and loss adjustment
expenses for claims that have been reported and claims that have been incurred
but not yet reported. loss reserves do not represent an exact calculation of
liability, but instead represent management estimates, generally utilizing
actuarial expertise and projection techniques, at a given accounting date.
these loss reserve estimates are expectations of what the ultimate settlement
and administration of claims will cost upon final resolution in the future,
based on our assessment of facts and circumstances then known, review of
historical settlement patterns, estimates of trends in claims severity and
frequency, expected interpretations of legal theories of liability and other
factors. in establishing reserves, we also take into account estimated
recoveries from reinsurance, salvage and subrogation.
the process of estimating loss reserves involves a high
degree of judgment and is subject to a number of variables. these variables can
be affected by both internal and external events, such as changes in claims
handling procedures, economic inflation, legal trends and legislative changes,
among others. the impact of many of these items on ultimate costs for claims
and claim adjustment expenses is difficult to estimate.
loss reserve estimation difficulties also differ significantly by product line
due to differences in claim complexity, the volume of claims, the potential
severity of individual claims, the determination of occurrence date for a claim
and reporting lags (the time between the occurrence of the policyholder event
and when it is actually reported to the insurer). informed judgment is applied
throughout the process. we continually refine our loss reserve estimates in a
regular ongoing process as historical loss experience develops and additional
claims are reported and settled. we rigorously attempt to consider all
significant facts and circumstances known at the time loss reserves are
established. due to the inherent uncertainty underlying loss reserve estimates
including but not limited to the future settlement environment, final
resolution of the estimated liability will be different from that anticipated
at the reporting date. therefore, actual paid losses in the future may yield a
materially different amount than currently reservedfavorable or unfavorable.
there are also risks which impact the
estimation of ultimate costs for catastrophes.
for example, the estimation of reserves related to hurricanes can be
affected by the inability by us and our insureds to access portions of the
impacted areas, the complexity of factors contributing to the losses, the legal
and regulatory uncertainties and the nature of the information available to
establish the reserves. complex factors
include, but are not limited to: determining whether damage was caused by
flooding versus wind; evaluating general liability and pollution exposures;
estimating additional living expenses; the impact
of demand surge; infrastructure disruption; fraud; the
effect of mold damage and business
interruption costs; and reinsurance collectibility. the timing of a catastrophes occurrence,
such as at or near the end of a reporting period, can also affect the
information available to us in estimating reserves for that reporting
period. the estimates related to
catastrophes are adjusted as actual claims emerge.
because of the uncertainties set forth
above, additional liabilities may arise for amounts in excess of the current
related reserves. in addition, our estimate of claims and claim
adjustment expenses may change. these additional liabilities or increases
in estimates, or a range of either, cannot now be reasonably estimated and
could result in income statement charges that could be material to our
operating results in future periods.
a portion of our loss reserves are for asbestos and
environmental claims and related litigation which aggregated $4.79 billion at
december 31, 2005. while the ongoing study of asbestos and environmental claims
and associated liabilities considers the inconsistencies of court decisions as
to coverage, plaintiffs expanded theories of liability and the risks inherent
in complex litigation and other
uncertainties, in the opinion of our management, it is possible that the
outcome of the continued uncertainties regarding these claims could result in
liability in future periods that differs from current reserves by an amount
that could be material to our operating results and financial condition in
future periods. see managements discussion and analysis of financial
condition and results of operationsasbestos claims and litigation and managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of
operationsenvironmental claims and litigation.
for a
discussion of claims and claim adjustment expense reserves by product line,
including examples of common factors that can affect required reserves, see managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of
operationscritical accounting estimatesclaims and claim adjustment expense
reserves.
the effects of emerging
claim and coverage issues on our business are uncertain. as industry practices and legal,
judicial, social and other environmental conditions change, unexpected and
unintended issues related to claim and coverage may emerge. these issues may
adversely affect our business by either extending coverage beyond our
underwriting intent or by increasing the number or size of claims. examples of
emerging claims and coverage issues include:
increases in the number and size of claims
related to expenses for testing and remediation of mold conditions;
increases in the
number and size of claims relating to construction defects, which often present
complex coverage and damage valuation questions;
adverse changes in loss cost trends,
including inflationary pressures in medical costs and auto and home repair
costs;
judicial
expansion of policy coverage and the impact of new theories of liability; and
a growing trend
of plaintiffs targeting property and casualty insurers, including us, in
purported class action litigation relating to claim-handling and other
practices.
the effects
of these and other unforeseen emerging claim and coverage issues are extremely
hard to predict and could harm our business and adversely affect our results of
operations.
the insurance industry is the subject of a number of investigations by
state and federal authorities in the united states. we cannot predict the outcome of these
investigations or the impact on our business or financial results. as part of ongoing, industry-wide
investigations, we and our affiliates have received subpoenas and written
requests for information from government agencies and authorities, including
from the attorneys general of numerous states, various states insurance and
business regulators and the securities and exchange commission. the areas of inquiry addressed to us include
our relationship with brokers and agents, our involvement with non-traditional
insurance and reinsurance products, branding requirements for salvage
automobiles and the reporting of workers compensation premiums. we and our affiliates may receive additional
subpoenas and requests for information with respect to these or other areas
from government agencies or authorities.
we are cooperating with these subpoenas and requests for
information. for further information,
see part i  item 3  legal proceedings.
it would be
premature to reach any conclusions as to the likely outcome of these matters or
the impact on our business or financial results. potential
outcomes could include enforcement proceedings or settlements resulting in
fines, penalties and/or changes in business practices that could adversely
affect our results of operations. in addition, these investigations may result in
changes in laws and regulations affecting the industry in general which could,
in turn, also adversely affect our results of operations.
our businesses are heavily regulated and changes in regulation may reduce
our profitability and limit our growth. we are extensively regulated and supervised in the
jurisdictions in which we conduct business, including
licensing and supervision by government regulatory agencies in such
jurisdictions. this regulation is
generally designed to protect the interests of policyholders, and not
necessarily the interests of insurers, their shareholders and other
investors. this regulation also relates
to authorization for lines of business, capital and surplus requirements,
investment limitations, underwriting limitations, transactions with affiliates,
dividend limitations, changes in control, premium rates and a variety of other
financial and nonfinancial components of an insurers business.
in recent years, the state insurance
regulatory framework has come under increased federal scrutiny, and some state
legislatures have considered or enacted laws that may alter or increase state
authority to regulate insurance companies and insurance holding companies.
further, the national association of insurance commissioners (naic) and state
insurance regulators continually reexamine existing laws and regulations, specifically
focusing on modifications to holding company regulations, interpretations of
existing laws and the development of new laws and regulations. in addition,
congress and some federal agencies from time to time investigate the current
condition of insurance regulation in the united states to determine whether to
impose federal regulation or to allow an optional federal incorporation,
similar to banks. we cannot predict with certainty the effect any proposed or
future legislation or naic initiatives may have on the conduct of our business.
insurance laws or regulations that are adopted or amended may be more
restrictive than current requirements or may result in higher costs.
although the united states federal
government does not directly regulate the insurance business, changes in
federal legislation and administrative policies in several areas, including
changes in financial services regulation and federal taxation, can
significantly harm the insurance industry, including us.
assessments and other surcharges for guaranty funds, second-injury funds,
catastrophe funds and other mandatory pooling arrangements may reduce our
profitability.
virtually all states require insurers licensed to do business in their state to
bear a portion of the loss suffered by some insureds as the result of impaired
or insolvent insurance companies. these assessments have leveled off in the
recent year and in certain states, have begun to decrease. these assessments may, however, increase in
the future if additional insolvencies occur.
many states also have laws that established second-injury funds to
provide compensation to injured employees for aggravation of a prior condition
or injury which are funded by either assessments based on paid losses or
premium surcharge mechanisms. in addition, as a condition to the ability to
conduct business in various states, our insurance subsidiaries must participate
in mandatory property and casualty shared market mechanisms or pooling arrangements,
which provide various types of insurance coverage to individuals or other
entities that otherwise are unable to purchase that coverage from private
insurers. the effect of these assessments and mandatory shared-market
mechanisms or changes in them could reduce our profitability in any given
period or limit our ability to grow our business.
a downgrade in our claims-paying and financial strength ratings could
significantly reduce our business volumes, adversely impact our ability to
access the capital markets and increase our borrowing costs. claims-paying and financial strength
ratings have become increasingly important to an insurers competitive
position. rating agencies review their
ratings periodically, and our current ratings may not be maintained in the
future. a downgrade in one or more of
our ratings could negatively impact our business volumes, because demand for
certain of our products in certain markets may be
reduced or our ratings could fall below minimum levels required to maintain
existing business. additionally, we may
find it more difficult to access the capital markets and higher borrowing costs
may be incurred. if our capital position
were to deteriorate or one or more rating agencies were to substantially
increase their capital requirements, we may need to raise equity capital in the
future in order to maintain our ratings or limit the extent of a downgrade. for
example, the frequency or severity of weather-related catastrophes in the last
two years may lead rating agencies to substantially increase their
capital requirements. the ratings are not in any way a
measure of protection offered to investors in our securities and should not be
relied upon with respect to making an investment in our securities. for further discussion about our ratings,
see, item 1 business  ratings.
our investment portfolio may suffer reduced returns or losses which could
reduce our profitability. investment returns are an important part of our overall
profitability. accordingly, fluctuations in the fixed
income or equity markets could impair our profitability, financial condition or
cash flows.
fluctuations
in interest rates affect our returns on, and the market value of, fixed income
and short-term investments, which comprised approximately 93% of the market
value of our investment portfolio as of december 31, 2005. in addition, defaults by third parties,
primarily from investments in liquid corporate and municipal bonds, who fail to
pay or perform on their obligations could reduce our net investment income and
net realized investment gains or result in investment losses.
we invest a
portion of our assets in equity investments, which are subject to greater
volatility than fixed income investments. general economic conditions, stock
market conditions and many other factors beyond our control can adversely
affect the value of our equity investments and our ability to control the
timing of the realization of net investment income. as a result of these
factors, we may not realize an adequate return on our investments, may incur
losses on sales of our investments and may be required to write down the value
of our investments, which would reduce our profitability.
the intense competition that we face could harm our ability to maintain
or increase our profitability and premium volume. the property and casualty insurance
industry is highly competitive and we believe that it will remain highly
competitive in the foreseeable future. we compete with both domestic and
foreign insurers, some of which have greater financial resources than we do. in
addition, several property and casualty insurers writing commercial lines of
business now offer products for alternative forms of risk protection, including
large deductible programs and various forms of self-insurance that utilize
captive insurance companies and risk retention groups. continued growth in
alternative forms of risk protection could reduce our premium volume. following
the terrorist attack on september11, 2001 and again following the hurricane
activity in 2004 and 2005, a number of new insurers and reinsurers were formed
to compete in the industry, and a number of existing market participants have
raised new capital which may enhance their ability to compete. financial institutions are now able to offer
services similar to us as a result of the gramm-leach-bliley act, which
repealed u.s.laws that separated commercial banking, investment banking
and insurance activities.
our
competitive position is based on many factors, including:
our
perceived overall financial strength,
ratings assigned by independent rating
agencies,
geographic scope of business,
agent, broker and
client relationships,
premiums
charged, contract terms and conditions, products and services offered
(including the ability to design customized programs),
speed of claims payment,
reputation, experience and qualifications
of employees,
local presence and
our ability to keep pace relative to
competitors with changes in technology and information systems.
we may have
difficulty in continuing to compete successfully on any of these bases in the
future. if competition limits our ability to write new business at adequate
rates, our results of operations will be adversely affected. see item 1  business  competition.
the inability of our insurance subsidiaries to pay dividends to us in
sufficient amounts would harm our ability to meet our obligations and to pay
future dividends.
we are a holding company and rely in part on dividends from our insurance
subsidiaries to meet our obligations for payment of interest and principal on
outstanding debt obligations and to pay dividends to shareholders and corporate
expenses. the ability of our insurance subsidiaries to pay dividends to us in
the future will depend on their statutory surplus, earnings and regulatory
restrictions.
we and our
insurance subsidiaries are subject to regulation by some states as an insurance
holding company system. this regulation generally provides that transactions
between companies within the holding company system must be fair and equitable.
transfers of assets among affiliated companies, certain dividend payments from
insurance subsidiaries and certain material transactions between companies
within the system may require prior notice to, or prior approval by, state
regulatory authorities. our insurance subsidiaries are subject to various
regulatory restrictions that limit the maximum amount of dividends available to
be paid to their parent without prior approval of insurance regulatory
authorities. the ability of our
insurance subsidiaries to pay dividends to us also is restricted by regulations
that set standards of solvency that must be met and maintained, the nature of
and limitation on investments, the nature of and limitations on dividends to
policyholders and shareholders, the nature and extent of required participation
in insurance guaranty funds and the involuntary assumption of hard-to-place or
high-risk insurance business, primarily in workers compensation insurance
lines. the inability of our insurance
subsidiaries to pay dividends to us in an amount sufficient to meet our debt
service obligations and other cash requirements could harm our ability to meet
our obligations and to pay future dividends.
loss or significant restriction of the use of credit scoring in the
pricing and underwriting of personal lines products could reduce our future
profitability. in
personal lines, we use credit scoring as a factor in pricing decisions where
allowed by state law. some consumer groups and regulators have questioned
whether the use of credit scoring unfairly discriminates against people with
low incomes, minority groups and the elderly and are calling for the
prohibition or restriction on the use of credit scoring in underwriting and
pricing. laws or regulations that significantly curtail the use of credit
scoring, if enacted in a large number of states, could reduce
our future profitability.
disruptions to our relationships with our distributors,
independent agents and brokers could adversely affect us. we market our insurance products primarily
through independent agents and brokers.
an important part of our business is written through fewer than a dozen
such intermediaries. loss of all or a
substantial portion of the business provided through such agents and brokers
could have an adverse effect on our future business volume and profitability.
if we experience
difficulties with outsourcing relationships, our ability to conduct our
business might be negatively impacted. we outsource certain technology functions
to third parties and may do so increasingly in the future. if we do not
effectively develop and implement our outsourcing strategy, third party
providers do not perform as anticipated or we experience technological or other
problems with a transition, we may not realize productivity improvements or
cost efficiencies and may experience operational difficulties, increased costs
and a loss of business. in addition, our ability to receive services from third
party providers outside of the united states might be impacted by cultural
differences, political instability, unanticipated regulatory requirements or
policies inside or outside of the united states. as a result, our ability to conduct our
business might be negatively impacted.
item 1b. unresolved staff comments
on july23, 2004, the company announced that it
was seeking guidance from the staff of the division of corporation finance of
the securities exchange commission with respect to the appropriate purchase
accounting treatment for certain second quarter 2004 adjustments totaling $1.63
billion ($1.07 billion after-tax). the company recorded these adjustments as
charges in its consolidated statement of income in the second quarter of 2004.
through an informal comment process, the staff of the division of corporation
finance has subsequently asked for further information, which the company has
provided. specifically, the staff has asked for information concerning the
companys adjustments to certain of spcs insurance reserves and reserves for
reinsurance recoverables and premiums due from policyholders, and how those
adjustments may relate to spcs reserves for periods prior to the merger. after
reviewing the staffs questions and comments and discussions with the companys
independent auditors, the company continues to believe that its accounting
treatment for these adjustments is appropriate. if, however, the staff disagrees,
some or all of the adjustments being discussed may not be recorded as charges
in the companys consolidated statement of income, thereby increasing net
income for the second quarter and full year 2004 and increasing shareholders
equity at december31, 2005 and 2004, in each case by the approximate
after-tax amount of the change. the effect on tangible shareholders equity
(adjusted for the effects of deferred taxes associated with goodwill and
intangible assets) at december31, 2005 and 2004 would not be material.
increases to goodwill and deferred tax liabilities would be reflected on the
companys balance sheet as of april1, 2004, either due to purchase
accounting or adjustment of spcs reserves prior to the merger.
item 2. properties
the company owns its corporate headquarters
buildings located at 385 washington street and 130 west sixth street, st. paul,
minnesota. these buildings are adjacent to one another and consist of
approximately 1.1 million square feet of gross floor space. the company also owned properties in
woodbury, minnesota, where an administrative services building and off-site
computer processing operations were located. the woodbury properties were sold
in aprilof 2005.
the company also owns six buildings in hartford,
connecticut. the company currently occupies approximately 1.8 million square
feet of office space in these buildings. the company also owns other real
property, which includes office buildings in fall river, massachusetts, and in
irving, texas, and a data center located in norcross, georgia. in addition, the
company leases 220 field and claim offices totaling approximately 5.1 million
square feet throughout the united states under leases or subleases with third parties.
the company owns a building in london, england,
which houses a portion of its operations in the united kingdom.
the company, through its subsidiaries, owns an
investment portfolio of income-producing properties and real estate funds.
included in this portfolio are four office buildings in which the company holds
a 50% ownership interest located in new york, new york, which collectively
accounted for approximately 15% of the carrying value of the property portfolio
at december31, 2005.
in the opinion of the companys management, the
companys properties are adequate and suitable for its business as presently
conducted and are adequately maintained.
item 3. legal proceedings
this sectiondescribes the major pending legal
proceedings, other than ordinary routine litigation incidental to the business,
to which the company or any of its subsidiaries is a party or to which any of
the companys property is subject.
asbestos and environmental-related
proceedings
in the ordinary course of its insurance business,
the company receives claims for insurance arising under policies issued by the
company asserting alleged injuries and damages from asbestos, hazardous waste
and other toxic substances which are the subject of related coverage
litigation, including, among others, the litigation described below. the company continues to be subject to
aggressive asbestos-related litigation.
the conditions surrounding the final resolution of these claims and the
related litigation continue to change.
tpc is involved in three significant proceedings (including
a bankruptcy proceeding) relating to acands,inc. (acands), formerly a
national distributor and installer of products containing asbestos. the proceedings involve disputes as to
whether and to what extent any of acands potential liabilities for current or
future bodily injury asbestos claims are covered by insurance policies issued
by tpc. the status of the various
proceedings is described below.
acands filed for bankruptcy in september2002 (in re: acands,inc., pending in the
u.s. bankruptcy court for the district of delaware). in its proposed plan of reorganization,
acands sought to establish a trust to pay asbestos bodily injury claims against
it and sought to assign to the trust its rights under the insurance policies
issued by tpc. the proposed plan and
disclosure statement filed by acands claimed that acands had settled the vast
majority of asbestos-related bodily injury claims currently pending against it
for approximately $2.80 billion. acands
asserts that, based on a prior agreement between tpc and acands and acands
interpretation of the july31, 2003 arbitration panel ruling described
below, tpc is liable for 45% of the $2.80 billion. on january26, 2004, the bankruptcy
court issued a decision rejecting confirmation of acands proposed plan of
reorganization. the bankruptcy court
found, consistent with tpcs objections to acands proposed plan, that the
proposed plan was not fundamentally fair, was not proposed in good faith and
did not comply with section524(g)of the bankruptcy code. acands has filed a notice of appeal of the
bankruptcy courts decision and has filed objections to the bankruptcy courts
findings of fact and conclusions of law in the united states district
court. tpc has moved to dismiss the
appeal and objections and has also filed an opposition to acands objections.
an arbitration was commenced in january2001 to
determine whether and to what extent acands financial obligations for bodily
injury asbestos claims are subject to insurance policy aggregate limits. on july31, 2003, the arbitration panel
ruled in favor of tpc that asbestos bodily injury claims against acands are
subject to the aggregate limits of the policies issued to acands, which have
been exhausted. in october2003,
acands commenced a lawsuit seeking to vacate the arbitration award as beyond
the panels scope of authority (acands,inc.
v. travelers casualty and surety co., u.s.d.ct. e.d. pa.). on september16, 2004, the district
court entered an order denying acands motion to vacate the arbitration
award. on january19, 2006, the
united states court of appeals for the third circuit reversed the district
courts decision and declared the arbitration award void on procedural grounds.
on february8, 2006, tpc filed a
motion to stay the issuance of the third circuits mandate in anticipation of tpcs
petition for a writ of certiorari to the united states supreme court.
in the other proceeding, a related case pending
before the same court and commenced in september2000 (acands v. travelers casualty and surety co.,
u.s.d.ct., e.d. pa.), acands sought a declaration of the extent to which the
asbestos bodily injury claims against acands are subject to occurrence limits
under insurance policies issued by tpc.
tpc filed a motion to dismiss this action based upon the july31,
2003 arbitration decision described above.
the district court found the dispute was moot as a result of the
arbitration panels decision. the
district court, therefore, based on the arbitration panels decision, dismissed
the case. if the january19, 2006 ruling of the third circuit described in
the paragraph above survives further appeal, this case will be reinstated.
the company continues to believe it has meritorious
positions in these acands-related proceedings and intends to litigate
vigorously.
in october2001 and april2002, two
purported class action suits (wise v.
travelers and meninger v.
travelers), were filed against tpc and other insurers (not including
spc) in state court in west virginia.
these cases were subsequently consolidated into a single proceeding in
the circuit court of kanawha county, west virginia. plaintiffs allege that the insurer defendants
engaged in unfair trade practices by inappropriately handling and settling
asbestos claims. the plaintiffs seek to
reopen large numbers of settled asbestos claims and to impose liability for
damages, including punitive damages, directly on insurers. lawsuits similar to wise were filed in massachusetts and
hawaii (these suits are collectively referred to as the statutory and hawaii
actions). also, in november2001, plaintiffs in consolidated asbestos
actions pending before a mass tort panel of judges in west virginia state court
moved to amend their complaint to name tpc as a defendant, alleging that tpc
and other insurers breached alleged duties to certain users of asbestos
products. in march2002, the court
granted the motion to amend. plaintiffs
seek damages, including punitive damages.
lawsuits seeking similar relief and raising allegations similar to those
presented in the west virginia amended complaint are also pending in ohio state
court against tpc and spc, in texas state court against tpc and spc, and in
louisiana state court against tpc (the claims asserted in these suits, together
with the west virginia suit, are collectively referred to as the common law
claims).
all of the actions against tpc described in the
preceding paragraph, other than the hawaii actions, had been subject to a
temporary restraining order entered by the federal bankruptcy court in new york
that had previously presided over and approved the reorganization in bankruptcy
of tpcs former policyholder johns-manville corporation and affiliated
entities. in august2002, the
bankruptcy court held a hearing on tpcs motion for a preliminary injunction
prohibiting further prosecution of the lawsuits pursuant to the reorganization
plan and related orders. at the
conclusion of this hearing, the court ordered the parties to mediation,
appointed a mediator and continued the temporary restraining order. during 2003, the same bankruptcy court
extended the existing injunction to apply to an additional set of cases filed
in various state courts in texas and ohio as well as to the attorneys who are
prosecuting these cases. the order also
enjoined these attorneys and their respective law firms from commencing any
further lawsuits against tpc based upon these allegations without the prior
approval of the court. notwithstanding
the injunction, additional common law claims were filed and served on tpc.
on november19, 2003, the parties advised the
bankruptcy court that a settlement of the statutory and hawaii actions had been
reached. this settlement includes a lump
sum payment of up to $412 million by tpc, subject to a number of significant
contingencies. after continued meetings
with the mediator, the parties advised the bankruptcy court on may25,
2004 that a settlement resolving substantially all pending and similar future
common law claims against tpc had also been reached. this settlement requires a payment of up to
$90 million by tpc, subject to a number of significant contingencies. each of these settlements is contingent upon,
among other things, an order of the bankruptcy court clarifying that all of
these claims, and similar future asbestos-related claims against tpc, are
barred by prior orders entered by the bankruptcy court in connection with the
original johns-manville bankruptcy proceedings.
on august17, 2004, the bankruptcy court
entered an order approving the settlements and clarifying its prior orders that
all of the pending statutory and hawaii actions and substantially all common
law claims pending against tpc are barred.
the order also applies to similar direct action claims that may be filed
in the future.
four appeals were taken from the august17,
2004 ruling. these appeals have been
consolidated and are currently pending.
the parties have completed briefing all of the issues and a hearing was
held before the district court on february22, 2006. the company has no obligation to pay any of
the settlement amounts unless and until the orders and relief become final and
are not subject to any further appellate review. it is not possible to predict how appellate
courts will ruleon the pending appeals.
spc, which is not covered by the bankruptcy court
rulings or the settlements described above, has numerous defenses in all of the
direct action cases asserting common law claims that are pending against
it. spcs defenses include the fact that
these novel theories have no basis in law; that they are directly at odds with
the well-established law pertaining to the insured/insurer relationship; that
there is no generalized duty to warn as alleged by the plaintiffs; and that the
applicable statute of limitations as to many of these claims has long since
expired. many of these defenses have been raised in initial motions to dismiss
filed by spc and other insurers. there
have been favorable rulings during 2003 and 2004 in texas and during 2004 and
2005 in ohio on some of these motions filed by spc and other insurers that
dealt with statute of limitations and the validity of the alleged causes of
actions. on may26, 2005, the court
of appeals of ohio, eighth district, affirmed the earliest of these favorable
rulings. in texas, only one court, in juneof
2005, has denied the insurers initial challenges to the pleadings. that ruling was contrary to the rulings by
other courts in similar cases, and spc intends to continue to defend this case
vigorously.
the company is defending its asbestos and
environmental-related litigation vigorously and believes that it has
meritorious defenses; however, the outcome of these disputes is uncertain. in this regard, the company employs dedicated
specialists and aggressive resolution strategies to manage asbestos and
environmental loss exposure, including settling litigation under appropriate
circumstances. for a discussion of other
information regarding the companys asbestos and environmental exposure, see item
2  managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of
operations  asbestos claims and litigation,  environmental claims and
litigation and  uncertainty regarding adequacy of asbestos and environmental
reserves.
currently, it is not possible to predict legal
outcomes and their impact on the future development of claims and litigation
relating to asbestos and environmental claims.
any such development will be affected by future court decisions and
interpretations, as well as changes in applicable legislation. because of these uncertainties, additional
liabilities may arise for amounts in excess of the current related
reserves. in addition, the companys
estimate of ultimate claims and claim adjustment expenses may change. these additional liabilities or increases in
estimates, or a range of either, cannot now be reasonably estimated and could
result in income statement charges that could be material to the companys
results of operations and financial condition in future periods.
shareholder litigation and related
proceedings
tpc and its board of directors were named as
defendants in three putative class action lawsuits brought by shareholders
alleging breach of fiduciary duty in connection with the merger of tpc and spc
and seeking injunctive relief as well as unspecified monetary damages.
the actions were captioned henzel, et al. v.
travelers property casualty corp., et al. (jud. dist. of waterbury,
ct. nov.17, 2003); vozzolo v.
travelers property casualty corp., et al. (jud. dist. of waterbury,
ct. nov.17, 2003); and farina v.
travelers property casualty corp., et al. (jud. dist. of waterbury,
ct. december15, 2003). the
farina complaint also named spc and its former subsidiary, adams
acquisition corp., as defendants, alleging that they aided and abetted the
alleged breach of fiduciary duty. on march18, 2004, tpc and spc
announced that all of these lawsuits had been settled, subject to court
approval. before court approval of the settlement, additional shareholder
litigation was commenced, as described below.
on september12, 2005, plaintiffs voluntarily withdrew their
complaints without prejudice.
beginning in august2004, following post-merger
announcements by the company, various shareholders of the company commenced
fourteen putative class action lawsuits against the company and certain of its
current and former officers and directors in the united states district court
for the district of minnesota. plaintiff shareholders alleged that
certain disclosures relating to the april2004 merger between tpc and spc
contained false or misleading statements with respect to the value of spcs
loss reserves in violation of federal securities laws. these actions were
consolidated under the caption in re st.
paul travelers securities litigation i, and a lead plaintiff and
lead counsel were appointed. an additional putative class action based on
the same allegations was brought in new york state supreme court. this
action was subsequently transferred to the district of minnesota and was
consolidated with in re st. paul travelers
securities litigation i. on june24, 2005, the lead
plaintiff filed an amended consolidated complaint. the complaint did not
specify damages. on august23,
2005, the company and the other defendants in in re st. paul travelers securities litigation
i moved to dismiss the amended consolidated complaint. on
november22, 2005, the parties reached an agreement to settle the case.
the settlement also encompasses the henzel, vozzolo and farina cases
described above. on december28, 2005, the
court approved the settlement.
three other actions against the company and certain
of its current and former officers and directors are pending in the united
states district court for the district of minnesota. two of these
actions, which were originally captioned
kahn v. the st. paul travelers companies,inc., et al. (nov.2,
2004) and michael a. bernstein profit
sharing plan v. the st. paul travelers companies,inc., et al.
(nov.10, 2004), are putative class actions brought by certain
shareholders of the company against the company and certain of its current and
former officers and directors. these actions have been consolidated as in re st. paul travelers securities litigation ii,
and a lead plaintiff and lead counsel have been appointed. on july11,
2005, the lead plaintiff filed an amended consolidated complaint. the amended consolidated complaint alleges
violations of federal securities laws in connection with the companys alleged
failure to make disclosure relating to the practice of paying brokers
commissions on a contingent basis, the companys alleged involvement in a
conspiracy to rig bids and the companys
allegedly improper use of finite reinsurance
products. on september26, 2005, the company and the other defendants in in re st. paul
travelers securities litigation ii moved to dismiss the amended
consolidated complaint for failure to state a claim. in the third of these
actions, an alleged beneficiary of the companys 401(k) savings plan commenced
a putative classaction against the company and certain of its current and
former officers and directors captioned
spiziri v. the st. paul travelers companies,inc., et al. (dec.28,
2004). the complaint alleges violations of the employee retirement income
security act based on allegations similar to those in in re st. paul travelers securities litigation i. on june1,
2005, the company and the other defendants in
spiziri moved to dismiss the complaint. on january4, 2006, the
parties in spiziri entered into a stipulation of
settlement. the settlement remains subject to court approval.
in addition, two derivative actions have been
brought in the united states district court for the district of minnesota
against all of the companys current directors and certain of the companys
former directors, naming the company as a nominal defendant: rowe v. fishman, et al. (oct.22,
2004) and clark v. fishman, et al.
(nov.18, 2004). the derivative actions have been consolidated for
pretrial proceedings as rowe, et al. v.
fishman, et al. and a consolidated derivative complaint has been
filed. the consolidated derivative complaint asserts state law claims,
including breach of fiduciary duty, based on allegations similar to those
alleged in in re st. paul travelers
securities litigation i and ii described above. on june10,
2005, the company and the other defendants in
rowe moved to dismiss the complaint. oral argument on the motion to
dismiss was presented on september19, 2005.
the company believes that the pending lawsuits have
no merit and intends to defend vigorously; however, the company is not able to
provide any assurance that the financial impact of one or more of these
proceedings will not be material to the companys results of operations in a
future period. the company is obligated to indemnify its officers and directors
to the extent provided under minnesota law. as partof that obligation,
the company will advance officers and directors attorneys fees and other
expenses they incur in defending these lawsuits.
other
proceedings
from time to time the company is involved in
proceedings addressing disputes with its reinsurers regarding the collection of
amounts due under the companys reinsurance agreements. these proceedings maybe
initiated by the company or the reinsurers and mayinvolve the terms of
the reinsurance agreements, the coverage of particular claims, exclusions under
the agreements, as well as counterclaims for rescission of the agreements. one
of these disputes is the action described in the following paragraph.
the companys gulf operation brought an action on may22,
2003, as amended on may12, 2004, in the supreme court of new york, county
of new york (gulf insurance company v.
transatlantic reinsurance company, et al.), against transatlantic
reinsurance company (transatlantic), xl reinsurance america,inc. (xl),
odyssey america reinsurance corporation (odyssey), employers reinsurance
company (employers) and gerling global reinsurance corporation of america
(gerling), to recover amounts due under reinsurance contracts issued to gulf
and related to gulfs february2003 settlement of a coverage dispute under
a vehicle residual value protection insurance policy. the reinsurers have
asserted counterclaims seeking rescission of the vehicle residual value
reinsurance contracts issued to gulf and unspecified damages for breach of
contract. separate actions filed by transatlantic and gerling have been consolidated
with the original gulf action for pre-trial purposes. on october1, 2003,
gulf entered into a final settlement agreement with employers, and all claims
and counterclaims with respect to employers have been dismissed.
on may26, 2004, the court denied gulfs motion
to dismiss certain claims asserted by transatlantic and a joint motion by
transatlantic, xl and odyssey for summary judgment against gulf. discovery is
currently proceeding in the matters. gulf denies the reinsurers allegations,
believes that it has a strong legal basis to collect the amounts due under the
reinsurance contracts and intends to vigorously pursue the actions.
based on the companys beliefs about its legal
positions in its various reinsurance recovery proceedings, the company does not
expect any of these matters to have a material adverse effect on its results of
operations in a future period.
as partof ongoing, industry-wide
investigations, the company and its affiliates have received subpoenas and
written requests for information from government agencies and authorities. the
areas of inquiry addressed to the company include its relationship with brokers
and agents, the companys involvement with non-traditional insurance and
reinsurance products, branding requirements for salvage automobiles and the
reporting of workers compensation premiums. the company or its affiliates have received
subpoenas or written requests for information, in each case with respect to one
or more of the areas described above, from: (i)state of california office
of the attorney general; (ii)state of california department of insurance;
(iii)licensing and market conduct compliance division, financial services
commission of ontario, canada; (iv)state of connecticut insurance
department; (v)state of connecticut office of the attorney general; (vi)state
of delaware department of insurance; (vii)state of florida department of
financial services; (viii)state of florida office of insurance regulation;
(ix)state of florida department of legal affairs office of the attorney
general; (x) state of georgia office of the commissioner of insurance;
(xi)state of illinois department of financial and professional
regulation; (xii) state of iowa insurance division; (xiii) state of maryland
insurance administration; (xiv) commonwealth of massachusetts office of the
attorney general; (xv) state of minnesota department of commerce; (xvi) state
of minnesota office of the attorney general; (xvii) state of new hampshire
insurance department; (xviii) state of new york office of the attorney general;
(xix) state of new york insurance department; (xx) state of north carolina
department of insurance; (xxi) state of ohio office of the attorney general;
(xxii) state of ohio department of insurance; (xxiii) commonwealth of
pennsylvania office of the attorney general; (xxiv) state of texas department
of insurance; (xxv) state of washington office of the insurance commissioner;
(xxvi) state of west virginia office of attorney general; (xxvii) the united
states attorney for the southern district of new york; and (xxviii) the united
states securities and exchange commission. the company and its affiliates mayreceive
additional subpoenas and requests for information with respect to the areas
described above from other agencies or authorities.
the company is cooperating with these subpoenas and
requests for information. in addition, outside counsel, with the oversight of
the companys board of directors, has been conducting an internal review of
certain of the companys business practices. this review initially focused on
the companys relationship with brokers and was commenced after the
announcement of litigation brought by the new york attorney generals office
against a major broker.
the internal review was expanded to address the
various requests for information described above and to verify whether the
companys business practices in these areas have been appropriate. the companys
review has been extensive, involving the examination of e-mails and
underwriting files, as well as interviews of current and former employees. the
company also continues to receive and respond to additional requests for
information and will expand its review accordingly.
to date, the company has found only a few instances
of conduct that were inconsistent with the companys employee code of conduct. the
company has responded, and will continue to respond, appropriately to any such
conduct.
the companys internal review with respect to finite
reinsurance considered finite products the company both purchased and sold. the
company has completed its review with respect to the identified finite products
purchased and sold, and has concluded that no adjustment to previously issued
financial statements is required. the related industry-wide investigations
previously described are ongoing, as are the companys efforts to cooperate
with the authorities, and the various authorities could ask that additional
work be performed or reach conclusions different from the companys. accordingly,
it would be premature to reach any conclusions as to the likely outcome of
these matters.
six putative classaction lawsuits and two
individual actions were brought against a number of insurance brokers and insurers,
including the company and/or certain of its affiliates, by plaintiffs who
allegedly purchased insurance products through one or more of the defendant
brokers. plaintiffs allege that various insurance brokers conspired with each
other and with various insurers, including the company and/or certain of its
affiliates, to artificially inflate premiums, allocate brokerage customers and
rig bids for insurance products offered to those customers. five of the classactions
were filed in federal district court, and the complaints are captioned: shell vacations llc v. marsh&
mclennan companies,inc., et al. (n.d. ill. jan.14,
2005), redwood oil company v. marsh&
mclennan companies,inc., et
al. (n.d. ill. jan.21, 2005),
boros v. marsh& mclennan companies,inc., et al.
(n.d. cal. feb.4, 2005), mulcahey v.
arthur j. gallagher& co., et al. (d.n.j. feb.23,
2005) and golden gate bridge, highway, and
transportation district v. marsh& mclennan companies,inc., et
al. (d.n.j. feb.23, 2005). the plaintiff in one of the five
actions, shell vacations llc,
later voluntarily dismissed its complaint. to the extent they were not
originally filed there, the federal class actions were transferred by the
judicial panel on multidistrict litigation to the united states district court
for the district of
new jersey and have been consolidated with other classactions
under the caption in re insurance brokerage
antitrust litigation, a multidistrict litigation proceeding in that
district. on august1, 2005, nineteen plaintiffs, including the four named
plaintiffs in the above-referenced class actions, filed an amended consolidated
classaction complaint naming various brokers and insurers, including the
company and certain of its affiliates, on behalf of a putative nationwide classof
policyholders. the complaint includes causes of action under the sherman act,
the racketeer influenced and corrupt organizations act, state common law and
the laws of the various states prohibiting antitrust violations. plaintiffs
seek monetary damages, including punitive damages and trebled damages,
permanent injunctive relief, restitution, including disgorgement of profits,
interest and costs, including attorneys fees. on november29, 2005, all
defendants moved to dismiss the complaint for failure to state a claim. on
february 13, 2006, the named plaintiffs moved to certify a nationwide class
consisting of all persons who between august 26, 1994 and the date of class
certification engaged the services of a broker defendant (or related entity) in
connection with the procurement or renewal of insurance and who entered into or
renewed a contract of insurance with one or more of the insurer defendants,
including the company. one
individual action naming various brokers and insurers, including several of the
companys affiliates, was filed in federal district court and is captioned delta pride catfish, inc. v. marsh usa, inc., et al. (d.
miss. sept. 13, 2005). that action has
also been transferred to the district of new jersey and is being coordinated
with in re insurance brokerage antitrust litigation. on january 17, 2006, all defendants moved to
dismiss the complaint in delta pride catfish, inc. for
failure to state a claim. one other
putative class action, bensley
construction,inc. v. marsh& mclennan companies,inc., et
al. (mass. super. ct. may16, 2005), and one other individual
action, office depot,inc. v.
marsh& mclennan companies,inc., et al. (fla. cir.
ct. june22, 2005), have been filed in state court and assert claims that
are similar to those asserted in in re insurance brokerage
antitrust litigation against various brokers and insurers, including
the company and/or certain of its affiliates, but have not been consolidated
with in re insurance brokerage antitrust litigation. certain defendants in bensley construction,inc., including the company, have removed
the action to the united states district court for the district of
massachusetts. on february 13, 2006, the
action was transferred to the district of new jersey for coordination with in re insurance brokerage antitrust litigation. office depot, inc.
was brought in florida state court and names several of the companys
subsidiaries. on november 9, 2005, the
court entered an order staying office depot
pending resolution of in re insurance brokerage
antitrust litigation. the
plaintiff in office depot, inc. has
appealed. the company believes that
these lawsuits have no merit and intends to defend vigorously.
in addition to those described above, the company is
involved in numerous lawsuits, not involving asbestos and environmental claims,
arising mostly in the ordinary course of business operations either as a
liability insurer defending third-party claims brought against policyholders,
or as an insurer defending claims brought against it relating to coverage or
the companys business practices. while the ultimate resolution of these legal
proceedings could be material to the companys results of operations in a
future period, in the opinion of the companys management none would likely
have a material adverse effect on the companys financial condition or
liquidity.
item4. submission of matters to a
vote of security holders
none.
executive officers of the registrant
information about the companys executive officers
is incorporated by reference from part iii, item 10 of this report.
partii
item5. market for registrants
common equity, related shareholder matters and issuer purchases of equity
securities
the companys common stock is traded on the new york
stock exchange, where it is assigned the symbol sta. prior to the merger of
spc and tpc, spcs common stock traded on the new york stock exchange under the
symbol spc. the number of holders of record, including individual owners, of
the companys common stock was 94,191 as of february23, 2006. this is not
the actual number of beneficial owners of the companys common stock, as shares
are held in street name by brokers and others on behalf of individual owners.
the following table sets forth the amount of cash dividends declared per share
and the high and low closing sales prices of the companys common stock for
each quarter during the last two fiscal years. spc historical data is presented
in the table for the first quarter of 2004, as spc common stock was issued to
effect the merger, and spc, as renamed, was the continuing public company
registrant following the merger.
high
low
cash
dividend
declared
first
quarter
$
39.40
$
35.89
$
0.22
second
quarter
39.87
33.71
0.23
third
quarter
45.14
39.60
0.23
fourth
quarter
46.70
41.37
0.23
first
quarter
$
43.35
$
39.20
$
0.50
second
quarter
42.99
39.18
0.22
third
quarter
39.70
32.53
0.22
fourth
quarter
37.54
30.99
0.22
the company paid cash dividends per share of $0.91
in 2005 and $1.16 in 2004. the 2004 total included a special cash dividend of
$0.21 per share in the second quarter of 2004, which was declared by spc prior
to the closing of the merger and resulted in the holders of spcs common stock
prior to the merger receiving aggregate dividends with record dates in 2004 of
$1.16 per share, which was spcs indicated annual dividend rate prior to the
merger. future dividend decisions will be based on and affected by a number of
factors, including the operating results and financial requirements of the
company and the impact of dividend restrictions. for information on dividends,
including dividend restrictions included in certain long-term loan or credit
agreements of the company and its subsidiaries, as well as restrictions on the
ability of certain of the companys subsidiaries to transfer funds to the company
in the formof cash dividends or otherwise, see item 7, managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of
operationsliquidity and capital resources. dividends will be paid by the
company only if declared by its board of directors out of funds legally
available, and subject to any other restrictions that maybe applicable to
the company.
issuer
purchases of equity securities
the table below sets forth information regarding
repurchases by the company of its common stock during the periods indicated.
periodbeginning
periodending
(a)
totalnumberof
shares(orunits)
purchased
(b)
averagepricepaid
pershare(orunit)
(c)
totalnumberof
sharesor(units)
purchasedaspartof
publiclyannounced
plansorprograms
(d)
maximumnumber
(orapproximate
dollarvalue)of
shares(orunits)
thatmayyetbe
purchasedunderthe
plansorprograms
oct.1, 2005
oct.31,
20,887
$
42.71
nov.1,2005
nov.30,
92,438
45.97
dec.1, 2005
dec.31,
14,021
45.32
total
127,346
$
45.36
all amounts in the table represent shares
repurchased to cover payroll withholding taxes in connection with the vesting
of restricted stock awards and exercises of stock options, and shares used to
cover the exercise price of certain stock options that were exercised.
item6. selected financial data
all data in the following table for the years 2001
through 2003 represent historical data for tpc. for accounting purposes, the
merger of spc and tpc was accounted for as a reverse acquisition with tpc
treated as the accounting acquirer. accordingly, this transaction was accounted
for as a purchase business combination, using tpcs historical financial
information and applying fair value estimates to the acquired assets,
liabilities and commitments of spc as of april1, 2004. historical results
are not necessarily indicative of results to be expected in the future.
atandfortheyearendeddecember31,(1)
(inmillions,exceptpershareamounts)
total
revenues
$
24,365
$
22,544
$
15,139
$
14,270
$
12,231
income from
continuing operations before cumulative effect of changes in accounting
principles
$
2,061
$
$
1,696
$
$
1,062
cumulative
effect of changes in accounting principles, net of tax (2)
(243
)
income (loss)
from discontinued operations
(439
)
net income
(loss)
$
1,622
$
$
1,696
$
(27
)
$
1,065
total
investments
$
68,287
$
64,368
$
38,653
$
38,425
$
32,619
total assets
113,187
111,246
64,872
64,138
57,778
claims and
claim adjustment expense reserves
61,090
59,070
34,573
33,736
30,737
total debt
5,850
6,313
2,675
2,544
2,078
total
liabilities (3)
90,884
90,045
52,885
53,100
46,192
company-obligated
mandatorily redeemable securities of subsidiary trusts holding solely junior
subordinated debt securities of tighi
total
shareholders equity
22,303
21,201
11,987
10,137
10,686
basic
earnings (loss) per share:(4)
income from
continuing operations before cumulative effect of changes in accounting
principles
$
3.04
$
1.42
$
3.91
$
0.52
$
3.18
cumulative
effect of changes in accounting principles, net of tax
(0.59
)
0.02
income
(loss) from discontinued operations (5)
(0.65
)
0.14
reported net
income (loss)
2.39
1.56
3.91
(0.07
)
3.20
goodwill
amortization
0.21
adjusted
earnings (loss) per share
$
2.39
$
1.56
$
3.91
$
(0.07
)
$
3.41
diluted
earnings (loss) per share:(4)
income from
continuing operations before cumulative effect of changes in accounting
principles
$
2.95
$
1.40
$
3.80
$
0.52
$
3.18
cumulative
effect of changes in accounting principles, net of tax
(0.59
)
0.02
income
(loss) from discontinued operations (5)
(0.62
)
0.13
reported net
income (loss)
2.33
1.53
3.80
(0.07
)
3.20
goodwill
amortization
0.21
adjusted
earnings (loss) per share
$
2.33
$
1.53
$
3.80
$
(0.07
)
$
3.41
year-end
common shares outstanding(4)(6)
693.4
670.3
435.8
435.1
333.3
per common
share data:
cash
dividends(4)(7)
$
0.91
$
1.16
$
0.65
$
12.07
$
1.22
book
value(4)
$
31.94
$
31.35
$
27.51
$
23.30
$
32.07
(1) on april1, 2004, travelers property casualty corp. (tpc) merged
with a subsidiary of the st. paul companies,inc. (spc), as a result of
which tpc became a wholly-owned subsidiary of spc and spc changed its name to
the st. paul travelers companies,inc. on october1, 2001, tpc
purchased the northland company and its subsidiaries (northland) from
citigroup. on october3, 2001, citigroup contributed the capital stock of
commercial guaranty casualty insurance company to tpc.
(2) cumulative effect of changes in accounting principles, net of tax (1)for
the year ended december31, 2002 consisted of a loss of $243 million as a
result of a change in accounting for goodwill and other intangible assets; and (2)for
the year ended december31, 2001 included a gain of $5 million as a result
of a change in accounting for derivative instruments and hedging activities and
a loss of $2 million as a result of a change in accounting for securitized
financial assets.
(3) total liabilities include minority interest liabilities of $14 million,
$20 million, $105 million and $87 million at december31, 2005, 2004, 2003
and 2002, respectively.
(4) earning per share, year-end common shares outstanding, cash dividends
per share and book value per share were restated for the years prior to 2004 to
reflect the impact of the merger with spc.
(5) in august2005, the company completed its divestiture of nuveen
investments,inc., its asset management subsidiary acquired in the merger.
accordingly, the companys share of nuveen investments results prior to
divestiture was classified as discontinued operations, along with the net
after-tax loss on disposal. prior period results were reclassified to be
consistent with the 2005 presentation.
(6) in march2002, tpc issued common stock through its initial public
offering (ipo).
(7) dividends per common share reflect the recapitalization effected as partof
tpcs corporate reorganization in 2002. see item 1 - business. during 2002, tpc
paid dividends of $5.10 billion in the formof a note payable and $158
million in cash to citigroup, its then sole shareholder. during 2001, tpc paid
dividends of $526 million to citigroup, its then sole shareholder.
item7. managements discussion and analysis of
financial condition and results of
operations
the following is a discussion and analysis of the
financial condition and results of operations of the st. paul travelers
companies,inc. (together with its subsidiaries, the company). on april1,
2004, travelers property casualty corp. (tpc) merged with a subsidiary of the
st. paul companies,inc. (spc), as a result of which tpc became a wholly-owned
subsidiary of spc, and spc changed its name to the st. paul travelers,inc.
in connection with the merger, each issued and outstanding share of tpc classa
(including the associated companies preferred stock purchase rights) and classb
par value $0.01 common stock was exchanged for 0.4334 of a share of the companys
common stock without designated par value. share and per share amounts for all
periods presented have been restated to reflect the second quarter exchange of
tpc common stock for the companys common stock in the merger. for accounting
purposes, this transaction was accounted for as a reverse acquisition with tpc
treated as the accounting acquirer. accordingly, this transaction was accounted
for as a purchase business combination, using tpc historical financial
information and applying fair value estimates to the acquired assets,
liabilities, and commitments of spc as of april1, 2004. beginning on april1,
2004, the results of operations and financial condition of spc were
consolidated with tpcs. accordingly, all financial information presented
herein for the twelve months ended december31, 2005 reflects the
consolidated accounts of spc and tpc. the financial information presented
herein for the twelve months ended december31, 2004 reflects only the
accounts of tpc for the three months ended march31, 2004 and the
consolidated accounts of spc and tpc for the nine months ended december31,
2004. the financial information presented herein for 2003 reflects the accounts
of tpc.
for more information regarding the completion of the
merger, including the calculation and allocation of the purchase price, refer
to note 2 of notes to the companys consolidated financial statements included
in this report.
the company completed the divestiture of its 78% equity interest in
nuveen investments in 2005, which is described in more detail later in this
discussion. the companys share of nuveen investments operating results in
2005 prior to divestiture was classified as discontinued operations, and the
companys prior year results were reclassified to conformto the 2005
presentation.
executive summary
2005 consolidated results of
operations
income from continuing operations of $2.06
billion, or $3.04 per share basic and $2.95 diluted
net income of $1.62 billion, or $2.39 per
share basic and $2.33 diluted, including loss from discontinued operations of
$439 million, or $0.65 per share basic and $0.62 diluted
net proceeds of $2.40 billion from the
divestiture of nuveen investments; loss from discontinued operations resulted
from significant tax provision related to sale
total cost of catastrophes of $2.19 billion
pretax (net of reinsurance) and $1.47 billion after-tax, primarily relating to
hurricanes katrina, rita and wilma
net unfavorable prior year reserve
development of $325 million pretax and $216 million after-tax, primarily due to
a pretax charge of $830 million ($548 million after-tax) to increase asbestos
reserves
gross written premiums of $23.74 billion; net
written premiums of $20.39 billion; net written premiums reduced by $121
million of reinstatement premiums related to catastrophes
gaap combined ratio of 101.3, including 10.7
points from catastrophe losses
pretax net investment income of $3.17 billion
($2.44 billion after-tax)
2005 consolidated financial
condition
total assets of $113.19 billion, up $1.94
billion from december31, 2004
total investments of $68.29 billion, up $3.92
billion from december31, 2004; fixed maturities and short-term securities
comprise 93% of total investments
increase in investments resulted from
proceeds from nuveen investments divestiture and strong operating cash flows
total debt of $5.85 billion, down $463
million from december31, 2004
shareholders equity of $22.30 billion, up
$1.10 billion from december31, 2004; book value per common share of
$31.94
consolidated overview
the company provides a wide range of property and
casualty insurance products and services to businesses, government units,
associations and individuals, primarily in the united states and in selected
international markets.
consolidated results of operations
fortheyearendeddecember31,
revenues
premiums
$
20,341
$
19,038
$
12,545
net
investment income
3,165
2,663
1,869
fee income
net realized
investment gains (losses)
(39
)
other
revenues
total
revenues
24,365
22,544
15,139
claims
and expenses
claims and
claim adjustment expenses
14,927
15,439
9,118
amortization
of deferred acquisition costs
3,252
2,978
1,984
general and
administrative expenses
3,229
2,945
1,641
interest
expense
total
claims and expenses
21,694
21,598
12,910
income
from continuing operations before income taxes and minority interest
2,671
2,229
income tax
expense
minority
interest, net of tax
(4
)
income
from continuing operations
2,061
1,696
discontinued
operations:
operating
income (loss), net of taxes
(663
)
gain on
disposal, net of taxes
income
(loss) from discontinued operations
(439
)
net
income
$
1,622
$
$
1,696
income
from continuing operations per share
basic
$
3.04
$
1.42
$
3.91
diluted (1)
$
2.95
$
1.40
$
3.80
gaap
combined ratio
loss and
loss adjustment expense ratio
71.9
%
79.4
%
70.7
%
underwriting
expense ratio
29.4
28.3
25.6
gaap
combined ratio
101.3
%
107.7
%
96.3
%
(1)the weighted average number of common shares
used in the diluted earnings per share calculation for the year ended december31,
2004 excluded the potentially dilutive effect of the companys convertible
junior subordinated notes because their effect was anti-dilutive.
the companys discussions related to all items,
other than net income, income from continuing operations, income (loss) from
discontinued operations, and segment operating income (loss), are presented on
a pretax basis, unless otherwise noted. throughout the following discussion,
the company references the impact of the merger, which in the context of a
comparison between 2005 and 2004 refers to the companys 2005 results
reflecting a full year of combined post-merger operations, whereas the companys
2004 results reflect combined post-merger operations for the nine months
subsequent to the april1, 2004 merger date, plus the results of tpc only
for the three months ended march31, 2004. in the context of a comparison
between 2004 and 2003, the impact of the merger refers to the companys 2004
results reflecting the components described above, whereas the companys 2003
results include the results of tpc only for the full year.
overview
income from continuing operations in 2005 totaled
$2.06 billion, or $2.95 per share diluted, compared with income from continuing
operations of $867 million, or $1.40 per share diluted, in 2004. the increase
in income in 2005 reflected the impact of the merger, improved non-catastrophe
current year loss experience in the companys three business segments, a
decline in net unfavorable prior year reserve development and strong growth in
net investment income. these factors more than offset a significant increase in
the cost of catastrophes (including reinstatement premiums and state
assessments), which totaled $2.19 billion in 2005, compared with $772 million
in 2004. catastrophe losses in 2005 primarily related to hurricanes katrina,
rita and wilma, as described in more detail in the following narrative. net
unfavorable prior year reserve development in 2005 totaled $325 million,
compared with net unfavorable prior year reserve development of $2.39 billion
in 2004. the 2005 total was driven by a charge of $830 million to strengthen
asbestos reserves as a result of the companys annual asbestos liability
review, which was partially offset by other non-asbestos related net favorable
prior year reserve development in the personal and commercial segments. the net
unfavorable prior year reserve development in 2004 total was the result of
several significant reserve charges recorded subsequent to the merger and which
are discussed in more detail in the following narrative.
in 2005, the company sold its equity interest in nuveen investments,
which constituted its asset management segment. the company recorded a net loss
from discontinued operations of $439 million in 2005, consisting primarily of
$710 million of tax expense which resulted from the difference between the tax
basis and the gaap carrying value of the companys investment in nuveen
investments, partially offset by the $224 million after-tax gain on the
divestiture and the companys share of nuveen investments net income for 2005.
income from discontinued operations of $88 million in 2004 represented the
companys share of nuveen investments net income for the year.
income from continuing operations in 2004 totaled
$867 million, or $1.40 per share diluted, compared with $1.70billion, or
$3.80 per share diluted, in 2003. the $829 million decline in 2004 compared
with 2003 was driven by $2.39 billion of net unfavorable prior-year reserve
development. that net unfavorable prior year reserve development in 2004 was
concentrated in the commercial and specialty segments and was primarily
comprised of $928 million to strengthen asbestos reserves as a result of the
completion of the companys annual asbestos liability review, merger-related
reserve strengthening of $500 million for construction and $300 million for
surety, $290 million to strengthen environmental reserves, $252 million related
to the financial condition of a specific construction contractor and $113 million
related to the commutation of agreements with a major reinsurer. these charges
are described in more detail in the following segment discussions. in addition,
2004 income from continuing operations included $296 million of pretax charges
to increase the allowance for estimated amounts due from reinsurance
recoverables, policyholder receivables and co-surety participations on a
specific construction contractor claim. net unfavorable reserve development in
the commercial and specialty segments in 2004 more than offset additional
income resulting from the merger and strong operating income generated by the
companys personal segment. in addition, the cost of catastrophes in 2004 of
$772 million was $420 million higher than in 2003. the catastrophe losses in
2004 were primarily driven by four hurricanes that struck the southeastern
united states in the third quarter.
revenues
earned premiums
the $1.30 billion increase in earned premiums in
2005 over 2004 primarily reflected the impact of the merger, which was
partially offset by a significant decline in earned premiums in the commercial
segments runoff operations, where business is intentionally being non-renewed,
and a decline in commercials ongoing operations due to a lower level of net
written premium volume in the last half of 2004 and first half of 2005. earned
premiums in 2005 were reduced by $121 million of reinstatement premiums related
to catastrophe losses, which are described in more detail in the cost of
catastrophe sectionof this discussion. earned premiums in 2004 were
reduced by $76 million of reinstatement premiums primarily related to reserve
charges recorded in the surety operation. partially offsetting these factors
were the impacts of new business growth and increased retention in many of the
companys insurance operations in 2005. in 2004, the $6.49 billion growth in
earned premiums over 2003 was primarily due to the merger, as well as the
earned premium effect of rate increases on renewal business over the previous
12 months and strong customer retention levels throughout a majority of the
markets served by the companys insurance operations.
net investment income
net investment income of $3.17 billion in 2005 grew $502 million, or
19%, over 2004, reflecting the impact of the merger, as well as an increase in
invested assets over the last twelve months, higher short-term interest rates
and a decline in investment expenses. the increase in invested assets in 2005
was driven by continued strong operational cash flows and the investment of the
$2.40 billion in proceeds from the divestiture of the companys equity interest
in nuveen investments. the average pretax investment yield in 2005 of 4.7%
declined slightly from 4.8% in 2004, due to the maturity of higher yielding
bonds and a higher proportion of tax-exempt investments. net investment income
in 2004 included $111 million from the initial public offering of one
investment.
net investment income in 2004 increased $794 million
over 2003, largely due to the increase in invested assets resulting from the
merger. in addition, strong operational cash flows in 2004 contributed to the
growth in invested assets. the average pretax investment yield in 2004 of 4.8%
declined from 5.3% in 2003, due to a higher proportion of tax-exempt
investments and lower yields on fixed income securities and alternative
investments. in addition, spcs investment portfolio acquired in the merger was
recorded at its fair value as of the merger date in accordance with purchase
accounting, which reduced the companys reported average investment yield in
2004.
the company allocates invested assets and the
related net investment income to its identified business segments. pretax net
investment income is allocated based upon an investable funds concept, which
takes into account liabilities (net of non-invested assets) and appropriate
capital considerations for each segment. the investment yield for investable
funds reflects the duration of the loss reserves future cash flows, the
interest rate environment at the time the losses were incurred and a+ rated
corporate debt instruments. this duration yield is compared to the average
portfolio yield and a new average yield is determined. it is this average yield
that is used in the calculation of net investment income on investable funds.
fee income
fee income in 2005 declined 6% when compared with 2004, as the national
accounts market, the primary source of the companys fee-based business,
experienced increased competition, particularly in the large account sector, as
described in more detail in the commercial segment discussion that follows. in
2004, the 26% increase in fee income reflected higher new business levels
resulting, in part, from a third quarter 2003 renewal rights transaction, as
well as renewal price increases and an increase in workers compensation
business written through state residual market pools.
net realized investment gains (losses)
net pretax realized investment gains in 2005 totaled $17 million, primarily
generated from sales of venture capital investments and equity securities. in
addition, the company realized a pretax gain of $21 million from the sale of
its personal catastrophe risk operation and $13 million of pretax net gains
related to u.s. treasury futures contracts which are marked to market and
settled daily. net realized investment gains in 2005 were reduced by $109
million of impairment losses, which were concentrated in the venture capital
portfolio as described in more detail later in this discussion.
the companys net pretax realized investment losses
of $39 million in 2004 included impairment charges totaling $80 million,
whereas net pretax realized gains of $38 million in 2003 included $90 million
of impairment charges. net pretax realized investment gains (losses) in 2004
and 2003 also included net losses of $44 million and $27 million, respectively,
related to u.s. treasury futures contracts. further information regarding the
nature of impairment charges in each year is included in the critical
accounting estimates sectionlater in this discussion.
other revenues
other revenues in all periods presented primarily
consist of premium installment charges.
written premiums
consolidated gross and net written premiums were as
follows:
(fortheyearendeddecember31,inmillions)
gross
net
gross
net
gross
net
commercial
$
10,426
$
8,429
$
10,636
$
8,311
$
8,668
$
6,862
specialty
6,836
5,729
5,511
4,771
1,457
1,258
personal
6,474
6,228
6,111
5,929
5,245
5,081
total
$
23,736
$
20,386
$
22,258
$
19,011
$
15,370
$
13,201
gross and net written premiums in 2005 both increased 7% over 2004,
primarily reflecting the impact of the merger. however, gross and net written
premium volumes in 2005 were down when compared to 2004 on a pro forma combined
basis. the declines were concentrated in the commercial segment, reflecting the
planned non-renewal of business in runoff and reduced premium volume in ongoing
operations due to increasingly competitive market conditions. in addition,
premium volume in the specialty segments construction operation was lower
than in 2004 on a pro forma basis due to the now-completed process of aligning
the underwriting profile of the two predecessor companies. net written premiums in 2005 were reduced by
$121 million of reinstatement premiums related to catastrophe losses discussed
later in this narrative, whereas 2004 net written premium volume was reduced by
$76 million of reinstatement premiums primarily related to reserving actions in
the specialty segment. however, premium volume in the personal segment
increased over 2004, driven by continued renewal price increases and unit
growth in the homeowners line of business. during 2005, the company experienced
strong retention levels on a company-wide basis, as the company focused on
retaining its existing book of well priced, profitable business. new business
levels in several of the companys insurance operations also increased over
2004. rate increases, however, were generally lower in 2005 compared with 2004,
reflecting increased competition and more aggressive pricing in the marketplace.
rates for certain products in selected markets declined from 2004 levels.
in the first quarter of 2005, the company implemented changes in the
timing and structure of reinsurance purchased in the specialty segment. the
change in structure resulted in an increase in ceded premiums in 2005 when
compared with 2004. the company also made a modest adjustment to 2004 ceded
written premiums to report at inception all ceded written premiums for
reinsurance agreements that have minimum amounts required to be ceded. previously,
ceded written premiums for certain of these agreements were reported over the
life of the contracts. this adjustment affected only the statistical disclosure
of net written premiums on a quarter-by-quarter basis; it did not affect net
written premium amounts over the lives of the respective agreements, nor did it
impact gross written premiums, earned premiums, operating results or capital. the
adjustment was made to conformthe statistical measurement of production
net written premiums  across the companys businesses.
the $5.81 billion, or 44%, increase in consolidated
net written premiums in 2004 compared with 2003 primarily reflected the impact
of the merger. on a pro forma combined basis, net written premiums in 2004 were
level with 2003. business retention levels in the majority of the companys
insurance operations remained consistent with 2003 levels. the level of rate
increases, however, continued to decline during 2004, reflecting the
increasingly competitive marketplace. new business volume in the commercial and
specialty segments in 2004 declined when compared with the combined new
business volume of spc and tpc in the prior year, reflecting the competitive
marketplace and the impact of new business premiums in 2003 from renewal rights
transactions. the non-renewal of certain commercial property, construction and
surety risks as well as certain personal lines business in the companys
operations at lloyds also negatively impacted premium volume in 2004. personal
net written premiums increased 17% in 2004 over 2003, due to strong organic
growth, new business resulting from a renewal rights transaction, strong
business retention levels and price increases.
claims and expenses
claims and claim adjustment expenses
claims and claim adjustment expenses of $14.93 billion in 2005 were
$512 million lower than the 2004 total of $15.44 billion. the 2005 total
included $2.03 billion of catastrophe losses, compared with $761 million of
such losses in 2004. the cost of catastrophes is discussed in more detail in
the following narrative. the 2005 total also included $325 million of net
unfavorable prior year reserve development, compared with $2.39 billion of net
unfavorable prior year reserve development in 2004. the net unfavorable prior
year reserve development in 2005 was concentrated in the commercial segment and
was primarily the result of a charge to increase asbestos reserves as a result
of the companys annual asbestos liability review. that charge was partially
offset by other, non-asbestos related, net favorable prior year development in
the personal and commercial segments. claims and claim adjustment expenses in
2005 also reflected improvement in current accident year non-catastrophe
related loss experience as compared with 2004.
claims and claim adjustment expenses of $15.44
billion in 2004 were $6.32 billion higher than the comparable 2003 total,
primarily reflecting the impact of the merger. the 2004 net unfavorable prior
year reserve development of $2.39 billion included a $928 million charge to
increase asbestos reserves, a $290 million charge to increase environmental
reserves, a charge of $252 million related to the financial condition of a
specific construction contractor, and charges to increase construction and
surety reserves in the specialty segment by $500 million and $300 million,
respectively. the company also commuted certain reinsurance agreements with a
major reinsurer in 2004 resulting in a $113 million prior year reserve
charge (in addition to a current year loss of $40
million). commutations are a complete and final settlement with a reinsurer
that results in a discharge of all obligations of the parties to the terminated
reinsurance agreement. these and other components of 2004 unfavorable prior
year reserve development are described in more detail in the segment
discussions that follow. net unfavorable prior year reserve development in 2003
totaled $476 million and was primarily the result of reserve strengthening at
the companys gulf subsidiary. the 2004 total also included $761 million of
catastrophe losses (net of reinsurance), compared with catastrophe losses of
$352 million in 2003.
cost of catastrophes. the companys cost of catastrophes, net
of reinsurance and including reinstatement premiums and state assessments,
totaled $2.19 billion in 2005, primarily resulting from hurricanes katrina,
rita and wilma. hurricane katrina made landfall in florida, louisiana,
mississippi and alabama in august2005, hurricane rita made landfall in
texas and louisiana in september2005 and hurricane wilma made landfall in
florida in october2005. in 2004, the cost of catastrophes, net of
reinsurance, totaled $772 million, all of which resulted from four hurricanes
charley, frances, ivan and jeanne  that also made landfall in the southeastern
united states. in 2003, hurricane isabel and several storms across the united
states accounted for the majority of the $352 million cost of catastrophes. the
cost of catastrophes was included in the companys business segments in the
respective periods as follows:
(fortheyearendeddecember31,inmillions)
commercial
$
1,240
$
$
specialty
personal
total
$
2,189
$
$
the following table provides additional information regarding the
components of the estimated cost recorded related to catastrophes in 2005.
(fortheyearendeddecember31,inmillions)
gross loss
and loss adjustment expenses
$
3,811
reinstatement
premiums
state assessments
reinsurance
recoverables
(1,786
)
total
estimated pretax loss
$
2,189
reinstatement premiums represent additional premiums payable to
reinsurers to restore coverage limits that have been exhausted as a result of
reinsured losses under certain excess-of-loss reinsurance treaties and are
recorded as a reduction of net written and earned premiums. after payment of
these reinstatement premiums, the company has coverage for one additional limit
under its corporate catastrophe treaty and continuing protection under most of
its other treaties. the term of the companys current corporate catastrophe
treaty expires on june30, 2006. state assessments are recorded as a
component of general and administrative expenses.
general and administrative expenses
the $284 million increase in general and administrative expenses in
2005 compared with 2004 primarily reflected the impact of the merger. in
addition, the 2005 total included $43 million of state assessments related to
catastrophe losses, and also reflected investments made for process
re-engineering and to support business growth and product development,
primarily in the personal segment. these factors were partially offset by the
benefit of expense efficiencies achieved since the completion of the merger.
the commercial segment in particular has realized significant expense savings
since the completion of the merger primarily through the elimination of
duplicate functions throughout the combined organization. included in the 2005
and 2004 totals were $112 million and $92 million, respectively, of
amortization expense related to finite-lived intangible assets acquired in the
merger, and a benefit of $12 million and $58 million, respectively, associated
with the accretion of the fair value adjustment to claims and claim adjustment
expenses and reinsurance recoverables. the 2004 total included a $62 million
increase in the allowance for uncollectible amounts due from policyholders for
loss-sensitive business (primarily high-deductible business). this increase
resulted from applying the companys credit-based methodology for determining
uncollectible amounts to the recoverables acquired in the merger. general and
administrative expenses in 2004 also included $29 million of restructuring
charges related to the merger.
other 2004 claims and expenses. other items increasing the 2004 claims and expenses compared to 2003
include $296 million of charges to increase the allowances for estimated
amounts due from reinsurance recoverables, policyholders receivables, and
co-surety participations on a specific construction contractor claim. the
increase in the allowance for uncollectible reinsurance recoverables recognized
a change in estimated disputes with reinsurers and is based upon the companys
reinsurance strategy of reduced reinsurance utilization, including the
cessation of ongoing business relationships with certain of spcs reinsurers,
and aggressive collection of reinsurance recoverables. a charge was also
recorded to increase the estimated uncollectible amounts due from policyholders
for loss sensitive business (primarily high deductible business). this increase
recognized a change in estimated uncollectible amounts due and resulted from
applying the companys credit based methodology for determining uncollectible
amounts to the recoverables acquired in the merger. because reinsurance
recoverables and amounts due from policyholders for loss sensitive business are
insurance contract-related assets, these assets are subject to the same types
of estimation variables as loss reserves. also during the second quarter of
2004, a participating co-surety on a contract surety exposure announced that
insurance regulators had approved its submitted run-off plan. based upon
industry knowledge of the co-suretys run-off plan and an analysis of the
co-suretys financial condition, the company concluded that it was unlikely to
collect the full amount projected to be owed by the co-surety and established
an appropriate level of reserves.
interest expense
the $50 million increase in interest expense in 2005 over 2004
primarily reflected the impact of a full year of interest expense on spc debt
assumed in the merger on april1, 2004. the companys debt outstanding at december31,
2005 declined by a net $463 million compared with year-end 2004. in 2004, the
$69 million increase in interest expense over 2003 reflected the incremental
expense associated with spc debt assumed in the merger.
effective tax rate
the companys effective tax rate on income from
continuing operations was 22.8%, 7.3% and 24.1% in 2005, 2004 and 2003,
respectively. the 2005 and 2003 effective rate reflected a higher level of
pretax income associated with profitable underwriting performance. the low 2004
effective rate primarily reflected the impact of an increase in nontaxable
investment income on a lower level of pretax income.
gaap combined ratios
catastrophe losses accounted for 10.3 points of the 2005 loss and loss
adjustment expense ratio, compared with 4.0 points in 2004. the loss and loss
adjustment expense ratio in 2005 included a 1.6 point impact of net unfavorable
prior year reserve development, whereas the 2004 ratio included a 12.6 point
impact of net unfavorable prior year reserve development. the 2005 loss and
loss adjustment expense ratio also reflected an improvement in current accident
year non-catastrophe loss experience, compared with 2004, primarily reflecting
reduced claim activity. the 1.1 point increase in the 2005 underwriting expense
ratio compared with 2004 reflected the impact of reinstatement premiums, state
assessments, earned premium declines in the commercial segment, increased
commission expenses in the personal segment and investments made for process
re-engineering and to support business growth and product development,
primarily in the personal segment. these factors were partially offset by
expense efficiencies realized since the completion of the merger.
the loss and loss adjustment expense ratio in 2004
included a 4.0 point impact from catastrophes and a 12.6 point impact from net
unfavorable prior year reserve development. the respective impacts of these
factors on the 2003 loss and loss adjustment expense ratio were 3.8 points and
2.8 points. the 2.7 point increase in the underwriting expense ratio in 2004
primarily reflected the impact of higher underwriting expenses related to the
business acquired in the merger, as well as expenses associated with the
merger.
discontinued operations
in march2005, the company and nuveen investments jointly
announced that the company would implement a program to divest its 78% equity
interest in nuveen investments, which constituted the companys asset
management segment and was acquired as partof the merger on april1,
2004. the divestiture was completed through a seriesof transactions in
the second and third quarters of 2005, resulting in net pretax cash proceeds of
$2.40 billion.
the company recorded a net operating loss from discontinued operations
of $663 million in 2005, consisting primarily of $710 million of tax expense
due to the difference between the tax basis and the gaap carrying value of the
companys investment in nuveen investments, partially offset by the companys
share of nuveen investments net income prior to divestiture. the company
recorded a pretax gain on disposal of $345 million ($224 million after-tax) in
2005. income from discontinued operations of $88 million in 2004 represented
the companys share of nuveen investments net income for the year.
the assets and liabilities related to nuveen investments were removed
from the respective lines of the companys consolidated balance sheet and
reported under the caption net assets of discontinued operations in the
consolidated balance sheet at december31, 2004. the current and deferred
tax liabilities generated by the difference between the companys tax basis and
the gaap basis of its investment in nuveen investments are reported on the
companys consolidated balance sheet as partof the companys current and
deferred tax liabilities.
renewal rights purchases
during the third quarter of 2003, tpc purchased from
royal& sunalliance usa (rsa), an unaffiliated insurer, the renewal
rights to rsas commercial lines national accounts, middle market and marine
businesses, and standard and preferred personal lines businesses. also during
the third quarter of 2003, tpc purchased from atlantic mutual, an unaffiliated
insurer, the renewal rights to the majority of atlantic mutuals commercial
lines inland marine and ocean cargo businesses written by atlantic mutuals
marine division. the total purchase price for these renewal rights
transactions, which was based in parton the level of business renewed by
the company, was $69 million.
results of operations by segment
commercial
results of the companys commercial segment were as
follows:
(fortheyearendeddecember31,inmillions)
revenues:
earned
premiums
$
8,574
$
8,816
$
6,552
net
investment income
1,944
1,728
1,324
fee income
other
revenues
total
revenues
$
11,202
$
11,279
$
8,454
total
claims and expenses
$
10,356
$
10,350
$
7,131
operating
income
$
$
$
1,061
loss and
loss adjustment expense ratio
83.6
%
81.8
%
75.4
%
underwriting
expense ratio
29.5
27.8
24.9
gaap
combined ratio
113.1
%
109.6
%
100.3
%
overview
operating income of $756 million in 2005 was 4% lower than operating
income of $786 million in 2004, as the significant increase in the cost of
catastrophes in 2005 was substantially offset by a decline in net unfavorable
prior year reserve development and the impact of the merger. the cost of
catastrophes totaled $1.24 billion in 2005, compared with $363 million in 2004.
catastrophes in both years were the result of the hurricanes described in the consolidated
overview sectionherein. net unfavorable prior year development totaled
$694 million in 2005, compared with $1.34 billion in 2004. the totals in both
years were primarily driven by charges to increase asbestos reserves.
operating income of $786 million in 2004 declined
$275 million, or 26%, from 2003. the decline was driven by net unfavorable
prior year reserve development of $1.34 billion in 2004, primarily related to
asbestos and environmental reserve strengthening. net unfavorable prior year
reserve development totaled $676 million in 2003, primarily related to reserve
strengthening in the gulf operation due to a line of business that insured the
residual values of leased vehicles. operating income in 2004 also included $363
million for the cost of catastrophes, compared with $103 million in 2003.
earned premiums
the $242 million decline in earned premiums in 2005 compared with 2004
reflected a significant decline in runoff operations, where business is
intentionally being non-renewed, and a decline in ongoing operations due to a
lower level of written premium volume in the last half of 2004 and first half
of 2005. these declines were partially offset by the impact of the merger. in
addition, the reinstatement premiums described in the consolidated overview sectionherein
reduced net earned premium volume in 2005 by $52 million. in 2004, earned
premium growth of $2.26 billion over 2003 was primarily due to the merger and
also reflected the earned premium effect of moderating renewal price increases
over the previous twelve months in the companys ongoing commercial business
lines. in addition, incremental premiums resulting from the renewal rights
transactions with royal& sunalliance and atlantic mutual in the third
quarter of 2003 contributed to premium growth in 2004.
net investment income
refer to the net investment income sectionof
the consolidated results of operations discussion herein for a description of
the factors contributing to the increase in the companys net investment income
in 2005 and 2004.
fee income
national accounts is the primary source of fee
income due to its service businesses, which include claim and loss prevention
services to large companies that choose to self-insure a portion of their
insurance risks, and claims and policy management services to workers
compensation residual market pools, automobile assigned risk plans and to
self-insurance pools. the $51 million, or 8%, decline in fee income in 2005
compared with 2004 was primarily due to increased competition, including the
loss of several large customers in the second half of 2004 and in early 2005. the
strong increase in 2004 fee income over 2003 reflected higher new business
levels, resulting, in part, from the third quarter 2003 renewal rights
transaction with royal& sunalliance, renewal price increases and more
workers compensation business being written by state residual market pools.
claims and expenses
claims and claim adjustment expenses in 2005 totaled
$7.45 billion, compared with $7.52 billion in 2004. included in those totals
were $1.17 billion and $363 million, respectively, of catastrophe losses (net
of reinsurance). net unfavorable prior year reserve development in the
commercial segment totaled $694 million in 2005, primarily due to charges to
increase asbestos reserves by $830 million and environmental reserves by $30
million. that unfavorable development was partially offset by other net
favorable prior year reserve development of $166 million, primarily in the commercial automobile, commercial multi-peril,
workers compensation and property lines of business. net unfavorable
prior year reserve development totaled $1.34 billion in 2004, which included a
$927 million charge to strengthen asbestos reserves and a $286 million charge
to strengthen environmental reserves. also included in the net unfavorable
prior year reserve development in 2004 was a $157 million addition to the
reserve for uncollectible reinsurance recoverables, $38 million from the
commutation of agreements with a major reinsurer and other net unfavorable
prior year reserve development primarily concentrated in the companys gulf
operations. partially offsetting the impact of these reserve increases in 2004
was favorable prior year reserve development in core commercial operations, which
resulted from reductions in the frequency of non-catastrophe related losses.
the asbestos charge in 2005 resulted, in part, from
higher than expected defense costs due to increased trial activity for
seriously impaired plaintiffs and prolonged litigation before cases are settled
or dismissed. the 2005 charge also considered the january2006 court
decision voiding, on procedural grounds, the previously rendered favorable
arbitration decision in the ongoing acands litigation. the asbestos charge
recorded in 2004 primarily resulted from an increase in litigation costs and
activity surrounding peripheral defendants. with regard to environmental
reserve additions, the 2005 charge was primarily related to declaratory
judgment costs, whereas the significant 2004 charge was related to revised
estimates of costs related to settlement initiatives. see the asbestos claims
and litigation and environmental claims and litigation sections herein for
further discussion of these reserves.
in 2003, net unfavorable prior-year loss development
in the commercial segment totaled $676 million, the most significant component
of which was $521 million of reserve strengthening in the gulf operations. that
reserve strengthening was primarily related to a line of business that insured
the residual values of leased vehicles and that had been placed in runoff in
late 2001, and the resolution of a residual value claim dispute. in addition,
in 2003 the company strengthened prior year reserves for certain runoff lines
of business, including assumed reinsurance. catastrophe losses in 2003 totaled
$103 million.
general and administrative expenses in 2005 totaled
$1.65 billion, an increase of 5% over the 2004 total of $1.58 billion, which
primarily reflected the impact of the merger. the 2004 total included
merger-related charges and charges to increase the allowances for estimated
amounts due from policyholders receivables. the commercial segment has realized
significant expense savings since the completion of the merger primarily
through the elimination of duplicate functions throughout the combined
operation.
gaap combined ratio
the
loss and loss adjustment expense ratio in 2005 included a 14.0 point impact
from catastrophe losses, compared with a 4.1 point impact from catastrophe
losses in 2004. net unfavorable prior year reserve development accounted for
8.1 points and 15.3 points, respectively, of the 2005 and 2004 loss and loss
adjustment expense ratios. excluding these factors from both years, the
adjusted 2005 loss and loss adjustment expense ratio was 0.9 points less than
the comparable 2004 adjusted ratio, reflecting the improvement in current
accident year loss experience compared with 2004. the adjusted 2004 loss and
loss adjustment expense ratio was 1.1 points better than the 2003 loss and loss
adjustment expense ratio adjusted to exclude prior year reserve development and
catastrophes, primarily driven by a reduction in non-catastrophe
weather-related losses during the year.
the
underwriting expense ratio in 2005 was 1.7 points higher than 2004, primarily
reflecting the significant earned premium declines described previously, and
the 0.4 point negative impact of the $52 million in reinstatement premiums and
$18 million of catastrophe-related state assessments. these factors were
partially offset by the favorable impact of merger-related expense savings
throughout the segment and personnel reductions in the commercial other sector.
the 2004 underwriting expense ratio included the impact of merger-related
restructuring charges and an increase in the allowance for uncollectible
amounts due from policyholders. the 2.9 point increase in the underwriting
expense ratio in 2004 compared to 2003 primarily reflected the impact of the
higher underwriting expense ratio of business in runoff (some of which was
acquired in the merger), the merger-related restructuring charges and the
increase in the allowance for uncollectible amounts due from policyholders.
written premiums
the commercial segments gross and net written
premiums by market were as follows:
(fortheyearendeddecember31,in
millions)
gross
net
gross
net
gross
net
commercial
accounts
$
4,852
$
4,386
$
4,648
$
4,210
$
3,593
$
3,251
select
accounts
2,799
2,722
2,631
2,555
2,105
2,047
national
accounts
2,627
1,230
2,410
1,040
1,462
total
commercial core
10,278
8,338
9,689
7,805
7,160
6,129
commercial
other
1,508
total
commercial
$
10,426
$
8,429
$
10,636
$
8,311
$
8,668
$
6,862
in commercial core operations, gross and net written premiums increased
6% and 7% over 2004 totals, primarily reflecting the impact of the merger. however,
2005 written premium volume in commercial core operations declined when
compared with 2004 on a pro forma combined basis, due to increasing competition
in the marketplace and pricing levels that were flat with 2004. business
retention levels throughout the core commercial operations, however, increased
over 2004, and new business levels improved over 2004. net written premiums in
2005 for commercial core operations were reduced by the $52 million of
reinstatement premiums related to catastrophe losses described in the consolidated
overview sectionherein. in commercial other operations, gross and net
written premiums declined 84% and 82%, respectively, from the comparable 2004
totals, reflecting the intentional non-renewal of business in the runoff
operations comprising this category.
commercials gross and net written premiums in 2004
increased 23% and 21%, respectively, over the 2003 totals, primarily reflecting
the impact of the merger. new business volume in 2004 declined when compared
with the combined new business volume of spc and tpc in 2003, reflecting the
increasingly competitive marketplace and the impact of higher premium flow in
2003 associated with several renewal rights transactions.
in the commercial accounts market, net written premiums of $4.39
billion grew $176 million, or 4%, over 2004 volume of $4.21 billion, primarily
reflecting the impact of the merger. however, 2005 written premium declined
from 2004 on a pro forma combined basis. business retention levels in this
market in 2005 increased over 2004 and were at historically high levels for the
year. new business volume also grew over 2004. renewal price changes in 2005 in
commercial accounts declined from 2004 and were modestly negative for the year,
reflecting the increased competitive market conditions. commercial accounts
net premium volume in 2004 grew $959 million, or 29%, over 2003 volume of $3.25
billion, primarily due to the merger. retention rates in 2004 were strong and
renewal price change increases were essentially flat by the end of the year.
new business levels were lower during the second half of 2004 as the benefit
from the atlantic mutual and royal& sunalliance renewal rights
transactions entered into in the third quarter of 2003 diminished in the second
half of the year.
in the select accounts market, net written premiums
in 2005 grew 7% over 2004, primarily reflecting the impact of the merger. however,
2005 written premium declined from 2004 on a pro forma combined basis. business
retention levels in 2005 increased over 2004 as the year progressed and were
also at historically high levels for the year in total. renewal price changes
in select accounts in 2005 were in the low single digit range for the year,
which was lower than renewal price increases in 2004. new business levels in
select accounts declined slightly from 2004. select accounts 2004 premium
volume of $2.56 billion increased $508 million, or 25%, over 2003, reflecting
the impact of the merger. overall retention levels were strong and renewal
price increases moderated to the mid single-digits in 2004. retention and
growth in 2004 reflected the companys competitive advantage in agency
automation, product offerings and service to agents in this high transaction
volume business.
in national accounts, gross written premiums in 2005 grew 9% over 2004,
and net written premiums grew $190 million, or 18%, compared with 2004, which
reflected the impact of the merger and changes in discover res reinsurance
program. the 25% increase in national accounts net premium volume in 2004 over
2003 reflected new business from the third-quarter 2003 royal&
sunalliance renewal rights transaction and higher business volumes in residual
market pools, the impacts of which were partially offset by a shift to
deductible and fee-based products by some of the companys clients. during
2005, results of the companys discover re operation were reclassified from the
specialty segment to national accounts in the commercial segment. all prior
period amounts were reclassified to be consistent with the 2005 presentation.
in commercial other, the 82% and 31% declines in
2005 and 2004 net premium volume, respectively, compared with the respective
prior years reflected the intentional non-renewal of business in the runoff
operations comprising this category (primarily gulf). certain business
previously written by gulf is now being written elsewhere in the commercial or
specialty segments. the runoff healthcare, reinsurance and international
business acquired in the merger produced minimal written premium volume in 2005
and 2004. in 2003, commercial other consisted primarily of results from the
gulf operation, which marketed products to national, mid-sized and small customers
and distributed them through both wholesale brokers and retail agents and
brokers throughout the united states with particular emphasis on management and
professional liability coverages and excess and surplus lines of insurance.
specialty
results of the companys specialty segment were as
follows:
(fortheyearendeddecember31,inmillions)
revenues:
earned
premiums
$
5,739
$
4,642
$
1,171
net
investment income
fee income
other
revenues
total
revenues
$
6,560
$
5,177
$
1,377
total
claims and expenses
$
5,573
$
6,231
$
1,048
operating
income (loss)
$
$
(648
)
$
loss and
loss adjustment expense ratio
64.6
%
100.1
%
51.3
%
underwriting
expense ratio
31.8
33.5
36.0
gaap
combined ratio
96.4
%
133.6
%
87.3
%
the specialty segments results for the twelve
months ended december31, 2004 reflect the results of tpcs bond and
construction operations for the twelve months ended december31, 2004 and
the post-merger results of spcs specialty operations, including spcs bond and
construction operations for the nine months ended december31, 2004.
results for 2003 represent tpcs bond and construction operations only.
overview
operating income of $679 million in 2005 improved by $1.33 billion over
the operating loss of $648 million in 2004. the significant improvement in 2005
operating income reflected the absence of net unfavorable prior year reserve
development, as well as strong net investment income, improved current accident
year results in several domestic businesses (particularly bond) and lower
commission expenses in certain business units. operating results in 2005 included
a cost of catastrophes of $356 million (net of reinsurance and including
reinstatement premiums), compared with $220 million of such costs in 2004. the
operating loss of $648 million in 2004 was driven by net unfavorable prior year
reserve development of $1.43 billion, including significant charges related to
the construction and surety reserves acquired in the merger, as well as other
reserving actions that are described in the narrative that follows. operating
results in 2004 also included $220 million for the cost of catastrophes
resulting from the four hurricanes described previously, whereas 2003 results
included no catastrophe losses.
earned premiums
earned premiums in 2005 increased $1.10 billion, or
24%, over 2004, primarily reflecting the impact of the merger. earned premiums
in 2005 were reduced by the $48 million in reinstatement premiums related to
the hurricane losses described in the consolidated overview sectionherein.
earned premiums in 2005 also reflected the inclusion of one additional month of
premium volume totaling $37 million to eliminate a reporting lag at the companys
operations at lloyds, the impact of which was partially offset by the sale of
certain classes of personal insurance business at those lloyds operations. earned
premiums in 2004 were reduced by $76 million of reinstatement premiums
primarily related to a reserve charge in the companys bond operation. earned
premiums of $4.64 billion in 2004 grew $3.47 billion over 2003, primarily
reflecting the impact of the merger
net investment income
refer to the net investment income sectionof
the consolidated results of operations discussion herein for a description of
the factors contributing to the increase in the companys net investment income
in 2005 and 2004.
claims and expenses
claims and claims adjustment expenses in 2005
included $308 million of current year catastrophe losses, compared with
catastrophe losses of $209 million recorded in 2004. catastrophe losses in both
periods were driven by the hurricanes described in the consolidated overview sectionherein.
net favorable prior year reserve development in 2005 totaled $9 million, as
favorable development in international operations was largely offset by
unfavorable development related to 2004 hurricane losses in the personal
catastrophe risk operation. net unfavorable prior year reserve development
totaled $1.43 billion in 2004, which included charges to increase the estimate
of the acquired net construction reserves by $500 million and the acquired net
surety reserves in the companys bond operation by $300 million, as well as a
$252 million charge related to the financial condition of a construction
contractor. the following discussion provides more information regarding the
net unfavorable prior year loss development related to these items in 2004, as
well as other reserving actions.
upon having access to each companys detailed
policyholder information, including underwriting, claim, and actuarial files on
april1, 2004, in connection with the closing of the merger, the company
was able to begin the detailed process of developing a uniformand
consistent approach to estimating the combined companys loss reserves. as partof
that process, a team of actuaries representing the historical actuarial
perspectives, judgments and methods applied by each legacy company, discussed
their views, methodologies, and analysis of available data.
in addition to the discussion in the critical accounting estimates sectionof
this report, other items specifically considered in the process of developing a
uniformand consistent approach to estimating the combined companys loss
reserves after the merger included interpreting the actuarial and claim data in
a uniformmanner and determining an appropriate level of data segmentation
for estimation purposes. this type of analysis involves a high degree of
judgment and can, and often does, lead to reserve estimates that differ
materially from those of prior periods, particularly in low frequency, high
severity and complex exposures. in addition, since the reserving process also
considers the expectations of future outcomes, the actuaries involved had to
analyze their differing views on key assumptions, such as predicting inflation,
estimating claim development patterns and determining expectations related to
judicial rulings and interpretations, among others. this informed judgment is
brought into the process by individuals such as actuaries, underwriters, claim
adjusters, and company management. ultimately, this process required an
analysis of the varying actuarial judgments and forward-looking assessments.
the result was similar to a single, ongoing insurance enterprise obtaining more
information in a reporting period than it had previously and identifying a
change in estimate in its insurance reserves in that period. accordingly, the
company recorded a $500 million and $300 million charge for construction and
surety, respectively, in the second quarter of 2004.
construction reserves.
beginning on april1, 2004, upon
the completion of the merger, personnel from the predecessor companies were
able to share detailed policyholder information, claim files and actuarial data
related to the acquired construction reserves. this enabled an analysis to be
performed in the second quarter of the acquired construction reserves using tpcs
long-established practices that includes evaluating exposures by type of claim
(e.g. construction defect, construction wrap-up, other), by type of coverage
(e.g. guaranteed cost, loss responsive, other) and by detailed line of business
(general liability, commercial auto, etc.), among others. for general liability
exposures, which include construction defect and construction wrap-up,
interpretation of underlying trends (both present and future) and the related
reserve estimation process is highly judgmental due to the low frequency/high
severity and complex nature of these exposures. in particular, for construction
defect, there is a high degree of uncertainty relating to whether coverage
exists, when losses occur, the size of each loss, expectations for future
interpretive rulings concerning contract provisions and the extent to which the
assertion of these claims will expand geographically. as a result, material
variations can and do occur among actuarial reserve estimates for these types
of exposures. in a merger, these differences are likely to be even more
pronounced. prior to a merger, each legacy company consistently applies its
assumptions, judgments and actuarial methods to estimate reserves. differences
between these assumptions, judgments and actuarial methods need to be
understood and reconciled, and a uniformapproach needs to be adopted for
the merged entity. in this situation, material adjustments can and do occur for
reserves related to exposures having a high degree of uncertainty.
analysis of the acquired construction reserves was
completed near the end of the second quarter of 2004. based upon the results of
this analysis, the company increased its estimate of the acquired net
construction reserves by $500 million, including $400 million for construction
defect and $100 million for construction wrap-up claims, and recognized this
change in estimate as an income statement charge in the second quarter. there
was no reinsurance associated with this charge.
surety reserves. personnel from the predecessor companies were
also able to share detailed spc policyholder information related to surety
reserves upon completion of the merger. access to this detailed information
enabled the company to performa claim-by-claim review of reserves and
claims handling strategies during the second quarter of 2004 using the combined
expertise of claims adjusters from the legacy companies. this type of review
involves considerable judgment, especially with respect to the economic outlook
within which claims will be settled, estimates for dates of loss occurrence and
evaluations of ibnr exposures for each insured. for example, as a result of the
detailed information obtained concerning contractors with reported claims, the
company considered whether or not losses were incurred but not yet reported on
one or more additional projects for each contractor examined.
also on april1, 2004, the company could begin
to use this detailed information to compare spcs assumptions, judgments and
actuarial methods that were underlying the acquired reserves with its own
assumptions, judgments and actuarial methods. similarities and differences were
found to exist. similarities included, but were not limited to, recognizing
claim reserves when it was determined that contractors and commercial surety
insureds were in default and thereby unable to meet their obligations, estimating
initial ibnr provisions, and periodically re-evaluating, at least quarterly,
the adequacy of the reserves established based on actual claims recorded and
revised estimates of ibnr. differences included judgments and methods related
to determining ibnr development factors and expected salvage, among others.
that these differences exist is not unusual for
surety reserve estimates. surety is a line of business for which there are low
frequency, high severity, very complex claims for certain exposures,
particularly those related to large construction contractors and commercial
surety insureds. determining the date of loss in these circumstances requires a
high degree of judgment. in addition, the claim reserve estimates even for
reported claims are also highly judgmental. these two factors, among others,
combine to make ibnr reserve estimations for surety extremely difficult. due to
this high degree of uncertainty, the informed judgments of different actuaries
could and do vary materially. as discussed above, in a merger, these
differences are likely to be even more pronounced.
the claim reviews and actuarial analyses were both
completed near the end of the second quarter of 2004. based upon the results of
these reviews and analyses, the company increased its estimate of the acquired
surety reserves by $300 million, net of $170 million of reinsurance, and
recognized this change in estimate as an income statement charge in the second
quarter.
other reserving actions. prior to the merger and beginning in the third quarter of 2003, spc
disclosed that a large construction contractor for which it had written several
surety bonds was experiencing financial difficulty. based upon an analysis of
the financial condition of the construction contractor that was performed in
the third quarter of 2003, a restructuring plan was adopted by the construction
contractor, its banks, and spc, among others, as a means to minimize estimated
losses. spc monitored the progress of the construction contractor toward
meeting the requirements of the restructuring plan throughout subsequent
quarters. spc also estimated and disclosed its estimated ultimate net losses
related to this exposure, beginning in the third quarter of 2003 and updated
each quarter thereafter, including the effects of advances made or expected to
be made to the construction contractor, applicable collateral, co-surety
participations and reinsurance. the size and complexity of these particular
construction contracts, coupled with the deteriorating credit quality of the
construction contractor and the inherent uncertainty as to whether it would
meet the obligations of the restructuring plan, resulted in a high degree of
judgment in estimating potential losses.
a comprehensive analysis that began in the first quarter
of 2004 was completed during the last half of the second quarter. based upon
this analysis, the company concluded that the contractor would not be able to
meet the targets set forth in its business and restructuring plans. therefore,
the company moved from supporting the contractors restructuring plan to
adopting a workout plan as a means to minimize estimated losses. under the
workout plan, the company would no longer provide additional surety bonds for
new projects of the construction contractor. also as partof the workout
plan, the company was able to implement additional accounting and engineering
procedures for each open project, which included using specialists to implement
additional forecasting, cash management, and reporting procedures, on both a
project-by-project and consolidated level. based upon this second quarter
change to a workout plan and the detailed financial analysis that was able to
be performed, the company increased its estimate of the ultimate net loss by
$252 million, including $9 million of reinsurance. this estimate took into
consideration paid amounts, net receivables, liquidated damages, overhead
costs, additional completion costs, including costs associated with replacing
the contractor, receivable discounts, current and future claims from owners and
subcontractors against the contractor, and the value of collateral, among
others.
also during the last half of the second quarter of
2004, a participating co-surety on this exposure announced that insurance
regulators had approved its submitted run-off plan. based upon industrys
knowledge of the co-suretys run-off plan and the companys analysis of its
financial condition, the company concluded that it was unlikely to collect the
full amount projected to be owed by the co-surety and established an
appropriate level of reserves. in
the second quarter of 2005, the company reached a settlement with the co-surety
whereby the co-surety made a payment to the company and was released from
further financial obligations to the company in connection with the specific
construction exposure. the settlement payment, coupled with the previously
established co-surety reserves, approximated the current estimate of the
co-suretys share of the bonded losses related to this exposure.
claim and claim adjustment expenses in 2004 included
$209 million of catastrophe losses, compared with no such losses in 2003.
results in 2004 also reflected increased current year loss ratios on portions
of the bond and construction books of business, and $150 million of unfavorable
prior year reserve development recorded in tpcs construction operation prior
to the merger.
general and administrative expenses in 2005 totaled
$893 million, an increase of 15% over the 2004 total of $779 million which
primarily reflected the impact of the merger. the 2005 total included the
impacts of a decline in commission expenses and expense efficiencies realized
as a result of the merger. in 2004, general and administrative expenses of $779
million were significantly higher than
the 2003 total of $222 million, reflecting the impact of the merger.
other items increasing 2004 claims and expenses
compared to 2003 include $217 million of charges to increase the allowances for
estimated amounts due from reinsurance recoverables, policyholders receivables,
and the co-surety on a specific construction contractor claim described above.
gaap combined ratio
the
loss and loss adjustment expense ratio in 2005 included a 5.8 point impact from
catastrophe losses, whereas the comparable 2004 ratio included a 4.6 point
impact from catastrophe losses. the loss and loss adjustment expense ratio for
2005 also included a 0.1 point benefit from net favorable prior year reserve
development, whereas the comparable 2004 ratio impact from net unfavorable
prior year reserve development totaled 30.8 points. excluding both factors in
each year, the 2005 loss and loss adjustment expense ratio improved over the
2004 ratio, reflecting the significant improvement in current year loss
experience in 2005. the impact of prior year reserve development and
catastrophe losses in 2003 was negligible.
the 2005 underwriting expense ratio improved 1.7
points compared with 2004, reflecting the impact of the merger and expense
efficiencies realized since the completion of the merger. the 2004 underwriting
expense ratio was also negatively impacted by an increase to the allowance for
estimated amounts due from policyholder receivables and merger-related
restructuring costs.
written premiums
specialty gross and net written premiums by market
were as follows:
(fortheyearendeddecember31,in
millions)
gross
net
gross
net
gross
net
bond
$
1,572
$
1,267
$
1,438
$
1,183
$
$
construction
financial
and professional services
other
1,991
1,605
1,455
1,186
total
domestic specialty
5,447
4,638
4,411
3,849
1,427
1,255
international
specialty
1,389
1,091
1,100
total
specialty
$
6,836
$
5,729
$
5,511
$
4,771
$
1,457
$
1,258
gross
and net written premiums in 2005 increased 24% and 20%, respectively, over
written premium volume in 2004. the increase in gross and net written premiums
in 2005 primarily reflected the impact of the merger. net written premiums in
2005 were reduced by $48 million of reinstatement premiums related to
catastrophe losses that are described in more detail in the consolidated
overview sectionherein, whereas net written premiums in 2004 were
reduced by $76 million of reinstatement premiums primarily related to reserving
actions in the bond operation. gross written premiums in 2005 were level, and
net written premiums were down 2%, compared with 2004 volume on a pro forma
combined basis. contributing to the decline in net written premiums were the
sale of certain credit-related personal lines classes of business previously
written at the companys operations at lloyds, and lower business volumes in
construction related to the now-completed process of aligning the underwriting
profile of the two predecessor companies. these declines were partially offset
by premium growth in the financial and professional services and several other
domestic specialty businesses. in addition, the elimination of a reporting lag
at the companys operations at lloyds resulted in $35 million and $28 million
of additional gross and net written premium volume in 2005, respectively. bond
net written premiums in 2005 were level with the 2004 pro forma combined
premium volume (excluding the impact of reinstatement premiums in 2004). in
2005, approximately $114 million of gross written premiums previously written
in the companys gulf operation in the commercial segment were written in
financial and professional services, compared with $90 million of gross written
premiums in 2004.
in domestic specialty operations, and international
specialty operations excluding lloyds, business retention levels in 2005 were
higher than in 2004. new business levels in domestic specialty operations were
also higher than in 2004. in international specialty operations excluding lloyds,
new business levels in 2005 were lower than in 2004. renewal price changes in
domestic specialty operations, while still positive, were down from 2004. as discussed
previously, in the first quarter of 2005, the company implemented changes in
the timing and structure of reinsurance purchased in the specialty segment. those
changes resulted in a slight increase in ceded premiums in 2005 over what would
have been ceded prior to the changes being implemented.
the $3.51 billion increase in net written premium
volume in 2004 over 2003 reflected the impact of the merger. however, the
repositioning of the bond and construction books of business primarily
accounted for a decline in net written premium volume in 2004 compared with the
2003 pro forma combined premium volume of spc and tpc. in construction, that
repositioning resulted in reduced retention levels when compared with 2003, and
new business levels also declined substantially. in bond, the repositioning of
the book of business was primarily centered in the spc business acquired in the
merger.
net written premiums in 2004 in the majority of the
companys remaining domestic specialty businesses were strong, with retention
levels at or above historical levels. renewal price change increases in these
operations moderated throughout the year to the upper single-digit level. new
business levels in 2004 were down compared with 2003, when renewal rights
transactions contributed to strong growth in new business. the impact of the
decline in new business levels in 2004 was partially offset by premium growth
resulting from the transfer of certain business from the companys gulf
operation, which was placed in runoff in the second quarter of the year. in
international specialty, business retention levels in 2004 (excluding lloyds)
were strong relative to pre-merger levels, and new business levels were
consistent with the pre-merger levels in 2003. in 2004, the company continued
its focus on retaining its profitable book of existing international specialty
business. at lloyds, premium volume in 2004 was negatively impacted by the
non-renewal of certain credit-related personal lines insurance coverages.
personal
results of the companys personal segment were as
follows:
(fortheyearendeddecember31,inmillions)
revenues:
earned
premiums
$
6,028
$
5,580
$
4,822
net
investment income
other
revenues
total
revenues
$
6,581
$
6,113
$
5,268
total
claims and expenses
$
5,464
$
4,732
$
4,555
operating
income
$
$
$
loss and
loss adjustment expense ratio
62.2
%
58.3
%
69.1
%
underwriting
expense ratio
26.9
24.9
23.7
gaap
combined ratio
89.1
%
83.2
%
92.8
%
overview
operating income of $775 million in 2005 was $164 million lower than
operating income of $939 million in 2004, largely due to the $593 million cost
of catastrophes primarily resulting from hurricanes katrina, rita and wilma in
2005, which are discussed in more detail in the consolidated overview sectionherein.
the cost of catastrophes in 2004 totaled $189 million, the majority of which
resulted from four hurricanes that struck the southeastern united states. the
personal segment in 2005 benefited from continued low non-catastrophe frequency
levels, net favorable prior year reserve development of $360 million and strong
net investment income levels. in 2004, the $447 million increase in operating
income over 2003 was driven by low non-catastrophe frequency levels,
particularly in the property line, strong premium growth resulting from unit
growth and price increases, and $378 million of net favorable prior year
reserve development. net favorable prior year development in 2003 totaled $212
million.
earned premiums
earned
premiums of $6.03 billion in 2005 increased $448 million, or 8%, over 2004
earned premiums of $5.58 billion, reflecting continued strong business
retention levels, new business volumes and renewal price increases over the
prior twelve months. earned premiums in 2005 were reduced by $21 million of
reinstatement premiums described in the consolidated overview sectionherein.
the $758 million, or 16%, growth in earned premiums in 2004 over 2003 was
primarily due to an increase in organic new business volume, new business
associated with the royal& sunalliance renewal rights transaction
entered into in the third quarter of 2003, strong business retention levels and
renewal price increases over the prior twelve months.
net investment income
refer to the net investment income sectionof
the consolidated results of operations discussion herein for a description of
the factors contributing to the increase in the companys net investment income
in 2005 and 2004.
claims and expenses
claims and claim adjustment expenses in 2005 included
catastrophe losses of $547 million, compared with catastrophe losses of $189
million in 2004. catastrophe losses in both years were primarily driven by the
hurricanes described in the consolidated overview sectionherein. net
favorable prior year reserve development in 2005 was $360 million, compared
with net favorable prior year reserve development of $378 million in 2004. the
favorable prior year development in 2005 and 2004 was primarily driven by
further declines in the frequency of non-catastrophe losses and lower than
expected severity resulting from recent claim initiatives. the favorable
development in both years also reflected the recognition of lower current
accident year frequency of non-catastrophe related claims in the homeowners and
other line of business and an improvement in frequency trends in the automobile
line of business.
catastrophe losses in 2004 of $189 million were $60
million less than the 2003 catastrophe loss total of $249 million. the 2003
losses resulted from a variety of storms across the united states, including
hurricane isabel in the third quarter of the year and wildfires in california. favorable
prior year reserve development of $378 million in 2004 was significantly higher
than favorable prior year development of $212 million in 2003. the favorable
2003 development was also primarily due to lower than expected frequency of
non-catastrophe related homeowners losses. the 2003 total also included a $50
million reduction in losses resulting from the september11, 2001
terrorist attack.
general and administrative expenses totaled $665
million in 2005, $536 million in 2004 and $420 million in 2003. the 2005 total
included $25 million of catastrophe-related assessments. the increases in both
2005 and 2004 reflected business growth and agent profit-sharing expenses
related to profitable underwriting results. in addition, the increases in both
years reflected investments in personnel, technology and infrastructure to
support business growth, and continued process re-engineering pilots targeted
to reduce loss severity.
gaap combined ratio
the loss and loss adjustment expense ratio for 2005
included a 9.3 point impact from catastrophe losses, whereas the comparable
2004 ratio included a 3.4 point impact from catastrophe losses. the impact from
net favorable prior year reserve development in 2005 was 6.0 points, compared
with 6.8 points in 2004. excluding the impact of these factors in both years,
the 2005 loss and loss adjustment expense ratio was 2.8 points better than the
2004 ratio, reflecting improvement in current accident year non-catastrophe
loss experience. the 2003 loss and loss adjustment expense ratio of 69.1 included
a 5.2 point impact of catastrophe losses and a 4.4 point benefit from net
favorable prior year reserve development. excluding these factors from both
2004 and 2003, the loss and loss adjustment expense ratio in 2004 improved
significantly over 2003, reflecting the earned impact of price increases that
continued to exceed loss cost trends and improvement in non-catastrophe loss
frequency.
the 2.0 point increase in the underwriting expense
ratio in 2005 compared with 2004 reflected an increase in commission expenses,
other insurance expenses, and taxes, licenses and fees. the increase in
commissions reflected a changing product mix and higher agent profit sharing
expenses. the increase in other insurance expenses reflected the impact of
continued process re-engineering investments and investments in personnel,
technology and infrastructure to support business growth and product
development. in addition, reinstatement premiums related to the catastrophe
losses reduced earned premium volume by $21 million in 2005, and
catastrophe-related assessments from various insurance pools increased taxes,
licenses and fees by $25 million. these
factors combined to result in a 0.5 point negative impact on the personal
segments 2005 underwriting expense ratio. in 2004, the 1.2 increase in the
underwriting expense ratio over 2003 reflected the impact of the same
investments described above.
written premiums
personal gross and net written premiums by product
line were as follows:
(fortheyearendeddecember31,in
millions)
gross
net
gross
net
gross
net
automobile
$
3,526
$
3,477
$
3,470
$
3,433
$
3,092
$
3,054
homeowners
and other
2,948
2,751
2,641
2,496
2,153
2,027
total
personal
$
6,474
$
6,228
$
6,111
$
5,929
$
5,245
$
5,081
gross
and net written premiums in 2005 increased 6% and 5%, respectively, over 2004. growth
in 2005 was concentrated in the homeowners and other product line, driven by
continued renewal price increases and unit growth. retention levels in both the
automobile and homeowners and other lines of business remained strong, and were
consistent with 2004. in the automobile line, renewal price increases in 2005
remained positive, but declined when compared with 2004. however, new business
premiums in 2005 in the automobile line increased over 2004, primarily due to
the introduction of the companys new multivariate pricing product in selected
states. net written premiums in 2005 were reduced by $21 million of catastrophe-related
reinstatement premiums described in the consolidated overview sectionherein.
gross
and net written premiums in 2004 increased 17% over 2003. both automobile and
homeowners and other net written premiums increased in 2004 due to higher new
business volumes, the impact of new business associated with the royal&
sunalliance renewal rights transaction entered into in the third quarter of
2003, continued strong retention, and renewal price increases.
the
personal segment had approximately 6.6 million and 6.3 million policies in
force at december31, 2005 and 2004, respectively. in the automobile line of business, policies
in force at december31, 2005 increased 4% over the same date in
2004. policies in force in the
homeowners and other line of business at december31, 2005 grew by 5% over
the same date in 2004. effective in the
first quarter of 2005, homeowners and other policies in force include certain
endorsements that had previously not been counted as separate policies. prior year periods were restated to conform
to the current year presentation.
in
the automobile line of business, policies in force at december31, 2004
increased 9% over 2003. policies in force in the homeowners and other line of
business at december31, 2004 increased by 15% over 2003.
interest expense and other
(for the year ended december31, in millions)
net loss
$
(184
)
$
(182
)
$
(112
)
the
increase in net loss for interest expense and other for 2005 compared with 2004
was primarily due to incremental interest expense on debt assumed in the merger
and a reduction in net investment income, which were mostly offset by the
absence of non-recurring merger-related charges and a reduction in non-interest
related other expenses in 2005.
the
net loss for interest expense and other for the year ended december31,
2004 increased $70 million compared with 2003, primarily reflecting the impact
of the merger. included in the increase was $46 million of incremental interest
expense on debt assumed in the merger. the 2004 total also included $9 million
of charges related to the merger that were recorded in the second quarter.
asbestos claims and litigation
the
company believes that the property and casualty insurance industry has suffered
from court decisions and other trends that have attempted to expand insurance
coverage for asbestos claims far beyond the intent of insurers and
policyholders. as a result, the company
continues to experience a significant number of asbestos claims being tendered
to the company by the companys policyholders (which includes others seeking
coverage under a policy), including claims against the companys policyholders
by individuals who do not appear to be impaired by asbestos exposure. factors underlying these claim filings
include intensive advertising by lawyers seeking asbestos claimants, the focus
by plaintiffs on new and previously peripheral defendants and entities seeking
bankruptcy protection as a result of asbestos-related liabilities. in addition to contributing to the overall
number of claims, bankruptcy proceedings may increase the volatility of
asbestos-related losses by initially delaying the reporting of claims and later
by significantly accelerating and increasing loss payments by insurers,
including the company. bankruptcy
proceedings are also causing increased settlement demands against those
policyholders who are not in bankruptcy but that remain in the tort
system. recently, in many jurisdictions,
those who allege very serious injury and who can present credible medical
evidence of their injuries are receiving priority trial settings in the courts,
while those who have not shown any credible disease manifestation have their
hearing dates delayed or placed on an inactive docket. this trend, along with the focus on new and
previously peripheral defendants, contributes to the loss and loss expense
payments experienced by the company. in
addition, the companys asbestos-related loss and loss expense experience is
impacted by the exhaustion or unavailability due to insolvency of other
insurance potentially available to policyholders along with the insolvency or
bankruptcy of other defendants. the
company is currently involved in coverage litigation concerning a number of
policyholders who have filed for bankruptcy, including, among others, acands,inc.,
who in some instances have asserted that all or a portion of their
asbestos-related claims are not subject to aggregate limits on coverage as
described generally in the next paragraph. (also see parti  item 3,
legal proceedings). these trends are
expected to continue in the near term.
as a result of the factors described above, there is a high degree of
uncertainty with respect to future exposure from asbestos claims.
in
some instances, policyholders continue to assert that their claims for
asbestos-related insurance are not subject to aggregate limits on coverage and
that each individual bodily injury claim should be treated as a separate
occurrence under the policy. it is difficult to predict whether these
policyholders will be successful on both issues or whether the company will be
successful in asserting additional defenses. to the extent both issues are
resolved in policyholders favor and other additional company defenses are not
successful, the companys coverage obligations under the policies at issue
would be materially increased and bounded only by the applicable per-occurrence
limits and the number of asbestos bodily injury claims against the
policyholders. accordingly, it is difficult to predict the ultimate cost of the
claims for coverage not subject to aggregate limits.
many
coverage disputes with policyholders are only resolved through settlement
agreements. because many policyholders make exaggerated demands, it is
difficult to predict the outcome of settlement negotiations. settlements
involving bankrupt policyholders may include extensive releases which are
favorable to the company but which could result in settlements for larger
amounts than originally anticipated. as in the past, the company will continue
to pursue settlement opportunities.
in
addition, proceedings have been launched directly against insurers, including
the company, challenging insurers conduct in respect of asbestos claims, and,
as discussed below, claims by individuals seeking damages arising from alleged
asbestos-related bodily injuries. the company anticipates the filing of other
direct actions against insurers, including the company, in the future. it is
difficult to predict the outcome of these proceedings, including whether the
plaintiffs will be able to sustain these actions against insurers based on
novel legal theories of liability. the company believes it has meritorious
defenses to these claims and has received favorable rulings in certain
jurisdictions. additionally, tpc has entered into settlement agreements, which
have been approved by the court in connection with the proceedings initiated by
tpc in the johns manville bankruptcy court. if the rulings of the bankruptcy
court are affirmed through the appellate process, then tpc will have resolved
substantially all of the direct action pending claims against it. (also, see parti
item 3, legal proceedings).
because
each policyholder presents different liability and coverage issues, the company
generally reviews the exposure presented by each policyholder on a
policyholder-by-policyholder basis. in the course of this review, the company
considers, among other factors: available insurance coverage, including the
role of any umbrella or excess insurance the company has issued to the
policyholder; limits and deductibles; an analysis of each policyholders
potential liability; the jurisdictions involved; past and anticipated future
claim activity and loss development on pending claims; past settlement values
of similar claims; allocated claim adjustment expense; potential role of other
insurance; the role, if any, of non-asbestos claims or potential non-asbestos
claims in any resolution process; and applicable coverage defenses or
determinations, if any, including the determination as to whether or not an
asbestos claim is a products/completed operation claim subject to an aggregate
limit and the available coverage, if any, for that claim. when an estimate of
the gross ultimate exposure for indemnity and related claim adjustment expense
is determined for a policyholder, the company calculates, by each policy year,
a ceded reinsurance projection based on any applicable facultative and treaty
reinsurance, past ceded experience and reinsurance collections. conventional
actuarial methods are not utilized to establish asbestos reserves. the companys
evaluations have not resulted in any data from which a meaningful average
asbestos defense or indemnity payment may be determined.
the
company also compares its historical gross and net loss and expense paid
experience, year-by-year, to assess any emerging trends, fluctuations, or
characteristics suggested by the aggregate paid activity. net asbestos losses
and expenses paid in 2005 were $399 million, compared with $301 million in
2004. this increase was primarily driven by inclusion of the spc business for
the full year in 2005 and substantial reinsurance recoveries in the third
quarter of 2004. approximately 42% in 2005 and 22% in 2004 of total net paid
losses relate to policyholders with whom the company previously entered into
settlement agreements limiting the companys liability. the lower percentage
experienced in 2004 reflected substantial reinsurance billings during the
year. in 2005, gross payments associated
with policyholders with settlement agreements totaled $203 million, compared
with $199 million in 2004.
at
december31, 2005, net asbestos reserves totaled $4.36 billion, compared
with $3.93 billion at december31, 2004. the companys annual ground-up
review of asbestos exposures resulted in a reserve increase of $830 million in
2005. in 2004, the company increased
asbestos reserves by $922 million following the same ground-up review process.
those reviews included an analysis of exposures and payment patterns by
policyholder category, as well as recent settlements, policyholder
bankruptcies, judicial rulings and legislative actions. the asbestos charge in
2005 resulted, in part, from higher than expected defense costs due to
increased trial activity for seriously impaired plaintiffs and prolonged
litigation before cases are settled or dismissed. the 2005 charge also considered the january2006
court decision voiding, on procedural grounds, the previously rendered
favorable arbitration decision in the ongoing acands litigation. the asbestos
charge recorded in 2004 primarily resulted from an increase in litigation costs
and activity surrounding peripheral defendants.
the
company categorizes its asbestos reserves as follows:
number of
policyholders
total net paid
net asbestos
reserves
(at and for the year ended december31, $in millions)
policyholders with settlement agreements
$
$
$
1,357
$
1,431
home office, field office and other
1,748
1,921
2,483
1,975
assumed reinsurance and international
total
1,776
1,950
$
$
$
4,364
$
3,932
the
policyholders with settlement agreements category includes structured
agreements, coverage in place arrangements and, with respect to tpc, wellington
accounts and the settlement of the statutory and hawaii actions and the common
law claims (for a fuller description of these matters, see item 3legal proceedings)
(collectively the direct action settlement). reserves are based on the
expected payout for each policyholder under the applicable agreement.
structured agreements are arrangements under which policyholders and/or
plaintiffs agree to fixed financial amounts to be paid at scheduled times.
structured agreements include the companys obligations related to ppg
industries,inc. (ppg). in may2002 the company agreed along with
approximately three dozen other insurers and ppg on key terms to settle asbestos
related coverage litigation under insurance policies issued to ppg. this
settlement is to be incorporated into the plan of reorganization (the plan)
proposed as part of the pittsburgh corning (pc) bankruptcy proceeding. there
remain a number of contingencies to consummation of the settlement including
the final execution of documents, court approval of the pc plan over pending
objections, approval of the settlement and possible appeals. pursuant to the
proposed pc plan, pc along with enumerated affiliated companies (including ppg
and corning) are to receive the protections afforded by section524(g)of
the bankruptcy code from certain asbestos related bodily injury claims. a
recent ruling by the third circuit court of appeals in the in re combustion engineering,inc.
(ce) matter may impact the scope of relief that is potentially available to the
debtor and other plan proponents. as a result, the pc bankruptcy court has
sought additional briefing on the impact of the ce decision on the proposed pc
plan. the company cannot predict what effect the ce decision may have with
respect to the bankruptcy courts approval of the current plan. a hearing is scheduled to be held on february28,
2006 before the bankruptcy court. it is
not possible to predict how or when the bankruptcy court will ruleon the
outstanding objections or how an appellate court may rulein the event of
an appeal. it is possible that the companys single payment contribution
pursuant to the proposed settlement of approximately $404 million after
reinsurance will be made in calendar year 2006. coverage in place arrangements
represent agreements with major policyholders on specified amounts of coverage
to be provided. payment obligations may be subject to annual maximums and are
only made when valid claims are presented. wellington accounts refer to the 35
defendants that are parties to a 1985 agreement settling certain disputes
concerning insurance coverage for their asbestos claims. many of the aspects of
the wellington agreement are similar to those of coverage in place arrangements
in which the parties have agreed on specific amounts of coverage and the terms
under which the coverage can be accessed. as more fully described in item 3,
legal proceedings, tpc has entered into the direct action settlement which is
still subject to a number of contingencies. if those contingencies are met,
then tpc will pay up to $502 million, possibly in calendar year 2006. one of
the contingencies includes affirmance by all appellate courts of the orders
entered by the united states bankruptcy court with respect to the direct action
settlement. it is not possible to predict how or when the appellate courts will
ruleon the pending appeals.
home
office, field office and other relates to policyholders for which settlement
agreements have not been reached, and also includes unallocated ibnr. policyholders are identified for home office
review based upon, among other factors: aggregate ultimate expected payments in
excess of a specified threshold (currently $100,000), perceived level of
exposure, number of reported claims, products/completed operations and
potential non-product exposures, size of policyholder and geographic
distribution of products or services sold by the policyholder. in addition to incurred but not reported
(ibnr) amounts contained in the reserves for home office and field office
policyholders, the company has established a reserve for further adverse
development related to existing policyholders, new claims from policyholders
reporting claims for the first time and policyholders for which there is, or
may be, litigation and direct actions against the company.
assumed
reinsurance exposure primarily consists of reinsurance of excess coverage, including
various pool participations. the companys international operations are exposed
to u.s. asbestos liabilities through participations in excess insurance
policies, quota share and excess of loss reinsurance policies, and retrocession
policies, underwritten in the london insurance market. details of exposures
under the reinsurance and retrocession policies are identified only when the
company is advised by the retrocedant.
the
following table displays activity for asbestos losses and loss expenses and
reserves:
(at and for the year ended december31, in millions)
beginning reserves:
direct
$
4,775
$
3,782
$
4,287
ceded
(843
)
(805
)
(883
)
net
3,932
2,977
3,404
reserves acquired:
direct
ceded
(191
)
net
incurred losses and loss expenses:
direct
ceded
(3
)
(13
)
net
accretion of discount:
direct
ceded
net
losses paid:
direct
ceded
(107
)
(166
)
(78
)
net
ending reserves:
direct
5,103
4,775
3,782
ceded
(739
)
(843
)
(805
)
net
$
4,364
$
3,932
$
2,977
see
uncertainty regarding adequacy of asbestos and environmental reserves.
environmental claims and litigation
the
company continues to receive claims from policyholders who allege that they are
liable for injury or damage arising out of their alleged disposition of toxic
substances. mostly, these claims are due to various legislative as well as
regulatory efforts aimed at environmental remediation. for instance, the
comprehensive environmental response, compensation and liability act (cercla),
enacted in 1980 and later modified, enables private parties as well as federal
and state governments to take action with respect to releases and threatened
releases of hazardous substances. this federal statute permits the recovery of
response costs from some liable parties and may require liable parties to
undertake their own remedial action. liability under cercla may be joint and
several with other responsible parties.
the
company has been, and continues to be, involved in litigation involving
insurance coverage issues pertaining to environmental claims. the company
believes that some court decisions have interpreted the insurance coverage to
be broader than the original intent of the insurers and policyholders. these
decisions often pertain to insurance policies that were issued by the company
prior to the mid-1970s. these decisions continue to be inconsistent and vary
from jurisdiction to jurisdiction. environmental claims when submitted rarely
indicate the monetary amount being sought by the claimant from the
policyholder, and the company does not keep track of the monetary amount being
sought in those few claims which indicate a monetary amount.
at
december31, 2005, approximately 75% of the net environmental reserve
(approximately $318 million) is carried in a bulk reserve and includes
unresolved environmental claims and incurred but not reported environmental
claims as well as for the anticipated cost of coverage litigation disputes
relating to these claims. the bulk reserve the company carries is established
and adjusted based upon the aggregate volume of in-process environmental claims
and the companys experience in resolving those claims. the balance,
approximately 25% of the net environmental reserve (approximately $107
million), consists of case reserves.
the
resolution of environmental exposures by the company generally occurs by
settlement on a policyholder-by-policyholder basis as opposed to a
claim-by-claim basis. generally, the company strives to extinguish any
obligations it may have under any policy issued to the policyholder for past,
present and future environmental liabilities and extinguish any pending
coverage litigation dispute with the policyholder. this form of settlement is
commonly referred to as a buy-back of policies for future environmental
liability. in addition, many of the agreements have also extinguished any
insurance obligation which the company may have for other claims, including but
not limited to asbestos and other cumulative injury claims. the company and its
policyholders may also agree to settlements which extinguish any future
liability arising from known specified sites or claims. provisions of these
agreements also include appropriate indemnities and hold harmless provisions to
protect the company. the companys general purpose in executing these
agreements is to reduce the companys potential environmental exposure and
eliminate the risks presented by coverage litigation with the policyholder and
related costs.
in
establishing environmental reserves, the company evaluates the exposure
presented by each policyholder and the anticipated cost of resolution, if any.
in the course of this analysis, the company considers the probable liability,
available coverage, relevant judicial interpretations and historical value of
similar exposures. in addition, the company considers the many variables presented,
such as the nature of the alleged activities of the policyholder at each site;
the allegations of environmental harm at each site; the number of sites; the
total number of potentially responsible parties at each site; the nature of
environmental harm and the corresponding remedy at each site; the nature of
government enforcement activities at each site; the ownership and general use
of each site; the overall nature of the insurance relationship between the
company and the policyholder, including the role of any umbrella or excess
insurance the company has issued to the policyholder; the involvement of other
insurers; the potential for other available coverage, including the number of
years of coverage; the role, if any, of non-environmental claims or potential
non-environmental claims, in any resolution process; and the applicable law in
each jurisdiction. conventional actuarial techniques are not used to estimate
these reserves.
in
its review of environmental reserves, the company considers: the adequacy of
reserves for past settlements; changing judicial and legislative trends; the
potential for policyholders with smaller exposures to be named in new clean-up
action for both on- and off-site waste disposal activities; the potential for
adverse development and additional new claims beyond previous expectations; and
the potential higher costs for new settlements. based on these trends,
developments and management judgment, the company increased its ibnr reserves
accordingly. in 2004, the company recorded a pretax charge of $290 million, net
of reinsurance, to increase environmental reserves due to revised estimates of
costs related to recent settlement initiatives. in 2005, the company recorded a
pretax charge of $30 million, net of reinsurance, primarily for declaratory
judgment costs.
the
duration of the companys investigation and review of these claims and the
extent of time necessary to determine an appropriate estimate, if any, of the
value of the claim to the company vary significantly and are dependent upon a
number of factors. these factors include, but are not limited to, the
cooperation of the policyholder in providing claim information, the pace of
underlying litigation or claim processes, the pace of coverage litigation
between the policyholder and the company and the willingness of the
policyholder and the company to negotiate, if appropriate, a resolution of any
dispute pertaining to these claims. because these factors vary from
claim-to-claim and policyholder-by-policyholder, the company cannot provide a
meaningful average of the duration of an environmental claim. however, based
upon the companys experience in resolving these claims, the duration may vary
from months to several years.
the
companys review of policyholders tendering claims for the first time has
indicated that they are lower in severity. these policyholders generally
present smaller exposures, have fewer sites and are lower tier defendants.
further, regulatory agencies are utilizing risk-based analysis and more
efficient clean-up technologies. however, the company has experienced an
increase in the anticipated settlement amounts of certain matters as well as an
increase in loss adjustment expenses. there also have been judicial
interpretations that, in some cases, have been unfavorable to the industry and
the company.
gross paid losses were $248 million and $200 million
in 2005 and 2004, respectively. the
increase in payments over 2004 was due to the inclusion of the spc business for
the entire period in 2005 and a significant settlement with one policyholder in
2005. tpc executed an agreement with
this policyholder which resolved all past, present and future hazardous waste
and pollution property damage claims, and all related past and pending bodily
injury claims. in addition, tpc and this
policyholder entered into a coverage-in-place agreement which addressed the
handling and resolution of all future hazardous waste and pollution bodily
injury claims. under the coverage-in-place
agreement, tpc has no defense obligation, and there is an overall cap with
respect to any indemnity obligation that might be owed. the first two of three payments related to
this settlement were made during 2005, and the final payment will be made in
the first quarter of 2006.
the
following table displays activity for environmental losses and loss expenses
and reserves:
(at and for the year ended december31, in millions)
beginning reserves:
direct
$
$
$
ceded
(84
)
(41
)
(62
)
net
reserves acquired:
direct
ceded
(58
)
net
incurred losses and loss expenses:
direct
ceded
(33
)
net
losses paid:
direct
ceded
(2
)
(48
)
(21
)
net
ending reserves:
direct
ceded
(69
)
(84
)
(41
)
net
$
$
$
uncertainty regarding adequacy of asbestos and environmental
reserves
as
a result of the processes and procedures described above, management believes
that the reserves carried for asbestos and environmental claims at december31,
2005 are appropriately established based upon known facts, current law and
managements judgment. however, the uncertainties surrounding the final
resolution of these claims continue, and it is difficult to determine the
ultimate exposure for asbestos and environmental claims and related litigation.
as a result, these reserves are subject to revision as new information becomes
available and as claims develop. the continuing uncertainties include, without
limitation, the risks and lack of predictability inherent in complex
litigation, any impact from the bankruptcy protection sought by various
asbestos producers and other asbestos defendants, a further increase or
decrease in asbestos and environmental claims which cannot now be anticipated,
the role of any umbrella or excess policies the company has issued, the
resolution or adjudication of some disputes pertaining to the amount of
available coverage for asbestos and environmental claims in a manner
inconsistent with the companys previous assessment of these claims, the number
and outcome of direct actions against the company and future developments
pertaining to the companys ability to recover reinsurance for asbestos and
environmental
claims. in addition, the companys asbestos-related claims and claim adjustment
expense experience has been impacted by the exhaustion or unavailability due to
insolvency of other insurance sources potentially available to policyholders
along with the insolvency or bankruptcy of other defendants. it is also not
possible to predict changes in the legal and legislative environment and their
impact on the future development of asbestos and environmental claims. this
development will be affected by future court decisions and interpretations, as
well as changes in applicable legislation, including legislation related to
asbestos reform. it is also difficult to predict the ultimate outcome of large
coverage disputes until settlement negotiations near completion and significant
legal questions are resolved or, failing settlement, until the dispute is
adjudicated. this is particularly the case with policyholders in bankruptcy
where negotiations often involve a large number of claimants and other parties
and require court approval to be effective. as part of its continuing analysis
of asbestos reserves, which includes an annual ground-up review of asbestos
policyholders, the company continues to study the implications of these and
other developments. the company completed the annual ground-up review during
the fourth quarter of 2005. also see parti  item 3, legal proceedings.
because
of the uncertainties set forth above, additional liabilities may arise for
amounts in excess of the current asbestos and environmental reserves. in
addition, the companys estimate of claims and claim adjustment expenses may
change. these additional liabilities or increases in estimates, or a range of
either, cannot now be reasonably estimated and could result in income statement
charges that could be material to the companys operating results and financial
condition in future periods.
investment portfolio
the
companys invested assets at december31, 2005 totaled $68.29 billion, of
which 93% was invested in fixed maturity and short-term investments, 1% in
equity securities, 1% in mortgage loans and real estate and 5% in other
investments. excluding the impact on invested assets of securities lending,
unrealized investment gains and losses, receivables for investment sales and
payables on investment purchases, the pretax average yield was 4.7%, 4.8% and
5.3% and the after tax average yield was 3.7%, 3.7% and 4.0% for the years
ended december31, 2005, 2004 and 2003, respectively.
because
the primary purpose of the investment portfolio is to fund future claims
payments, the company employs a conservative investment philosophy. the companys
fixed maturity portfolio at december31, 2005 totaled $58.98 billion,
comprising $58.71 billion of publicly traded fixed maturities and $274 million
of private fixed maturities. the weighted average quality ratings of the
companys publicly traded fixed maturity portfolio and private fixed maturity
portfolio at december31, 2005 were aa1 and a3, respectively. included in
the fixed maturity portfolio at that date was approximately $1.75 billion of
below investment grade securities. during 2005, holdings of tax-exempt
securities were increased to $31.46 billion to take advantage of their
relatively high credit quality and attractive after-tax yields. the average
effective duration of the fixed maturity portfolio, including short-term
investments, was 3.9 years as of december31, 2005 (4.3 years excluding
short-term investments), compared with 4.1 years as of december31, 2004
(4.4 years excluding short-term investments).
the
following table sets forth the companys combined fixed maturity investment
portfolio classified by moodys investors service ratings:
(at december31, 2005, in millions)
carrying
value
percentoftotal
carrying value
quality rating:
aaa
$
38,477
65.2
%
aa
11,099
18.8
a
4,469
7.6
baa
3,186
5.4
total
investment grade
57,231
97.0
non-investment
grade
1,752
3.0
total fixed maturity
investments
$
58,983
100.0
%
the
company makes investments in collateralized mortgage obligations (cmos) that
typically have high credit quality, offer good liquidity, and are expected to
provide an advantage in yield compared to u.s. treasury securities. the companys
investment strategy is to purchase cmo tranches which offer the most favorable
return given the risks involved. one significant risk evaluated is prepayment
sensitivity. while prepayment risk (either shortening or lengthening of
duration) and its effect on total return cannot be fully controlled,
particularly when interest rates move dramatically, the investment process
generally favors securities that control this risk within expected interest
rate ranges. the company does invest in other types of cmo tranches if a
careful assessment indicates a favorable risk/return tradeoff. the company does
not purchase residual interests in cmos.
at
december31, 2005 and 2004, the company held cmos classified as available
for sale with a fair value of $3.43 billion and $3.30 billion, respectively
(excluding commercial mortgage-backed securities of $1.16 billion and $953
million, respectively). approximately 43% and 53% of the companys cmo holdings
are guaranteed by or fully collateralized by securities issued by gnma, fnma or
fhlmc at december31, 2005 and 2004, respectively. in addition, the
company held $4.83 billion and $4.66 billion of gnma, fnma, fhlmc or fha
mortgage-backed pass-through securities classified as available for sale at december31,
2005 and 2004, respectively. virtually all of these securities are rated aaa.
the
companys real estate investments include warehouses and office buildings and
other commercial land and properties that are directly owned. the companys other investments primarily
comprise venture capital, through direct ownership and limited partnerships,
private equity limited partnerships, joint ventures, other limited partnerships
and trading securities, which are subject to more volatility than the companys
fixed income investments, but historically have provided a higher return. at december31,
2005 and 2004, the carrying value of the companys other investments was $3.03
billion and $3.43 billion, respectively.
impairment
charges included in net realized investment gains (losses) were as follows:
(for the year ended december31, in millions)
fixed maturities
$
$
$
equity securities
venture capital
real estate and other
total
$
$
$
for
the year ended december31, 2005, the company recognized the following
other-than-temporary impairments:
$11 million in the fixed income portfolio related to various issuers
due to credit risk associated with the issuers deteriorated financial
position.
$80 million in the venture capital portfolio on 22 holdings. two of the
holdings were impaired due to new financings at less than favorable rates. fifteen
holdings experienced fundamental economic deterioration (characterized by less
than expected revenues or a fundamental change in product). three of the
holdings were impaired due to the impending sale, liquidation or shutdown of
the entity. two of the holdings were public securities whose cost basis was not
anticipated to be recovered over the expected holding period. the company
continually evaluates current developments in the market that have the
potential to affect the valuation of the companys investments.
$18 million in its real estate and other holdings. the losses recorded
were the result of an equity partnership and a private stock holding which both
experienced fundamental deterioration in their financial position.
for
the year ended december31, 2004, the company recognized the following
other-than-temporary impairments:
$25 million in the fixed income portfolio related to various issuers
due to credit risk associated with the issuers deteriorated financial
position.
$5 million in the equity portfolio when it became apparent that the
cost basis of those securities would not be recovered over the expected holding
period.
$40 million in its venture capital portfolio on 16 holdings. three of
the holdings were impaired due to new financings at less than favorable rates.
five holdings experienced fundamental economic deterioration (characterized by
less than expected revenues or a fundamental change in product). eight of the
holdings were impaired due to the impending sale, liquidation or shutdown of
the entity. the company continually evaluates current developments in the
market that have the potential to affect the valuation of the companys
investments.
$10 million in its real estate and other holdings. the losses recorded
were the result of falling rental rates and occupancies in three of the companys
real estate investment holdings.
the
company recognized other-than-temporary impairments of $65 million in the fixed
income portfolio during 2003 related to various issuers, with $8 million due to
companies filing bankruptcy and the remainder related to credit risk due to the
issuers deteriorated financial position.
for
publicly traded securities, the amounts of the impairments were recognized by
writing down the investments to quoted market prices. for non-publicly traded
securities, impairments are recognized by writing down the investment to its
estimated fair value, as determined during the companys quarterly internal
review process.
the
specific circumstances that led to the impairments described above did not
materially impact other individual investments held during 2005 or 2004.
the
following table summarizes for all fixed maturities and equity securities available
for sale and for equity securities reported at fair value for which fair value
is less than 80% of amortized cost at december31, 2005, the gross
unrealized investment loss by length of time those securities have continuously
been in an unrealized loss position:
period for which fair value is
less than 80% of amortized cost
(in millions)
lessthan3
months
greaterthan3
months, less
than 6 months
greaterthan6
months, less
than
12 months
greaterthan
12 months
total
fixed maturities
$
$
$
$
$
equity securities
venture capital
total
$
$
$
$
$
unrealized
investment losses as of december31, 2005 represent less than 1% of the
portfolio, and, therefore, any impact on the companys financial position would
not be significant.
at
december31, 2005, non-investment grade securities comprised 3% of the
companys fixed income investment portfolio. included in those categories at december31,
2005 were securities in an unrealized loss position that, in the aggregate, had
an amortized cost of $907 million and a fair value of $870 million, resulting
in a net pretax unrealized investment loss of $37 million. these securities in
an unrealized loss position represented less than 2% of the total amortized
cost and less than 2% of the fair value of the fixed income portfolio at december31,
2005, and accounted for 7% of the total pretax unrealized investment loss in
the fixed income portfolio.
following
are the pretax realized losses on investments sold during the year ended december31,
2005:
(in millions)
loss
fairvalue
fixed maturities
$
$
3,274
equity securities
other
total
$
$
3,682
resulting
purchases and sales of investments are based on cash requirements, the
characteristics of the insurance liabilities and current market conditions. the
company identifies investments to be sold to achieve its primary investment
goals of assuring the companys ability to meet policyholder obligations as
well as to optimize investment returns, given these obligations.
outlook
the
companys strategic objective is to enhance its position as a consistently
profitable market leader and a cost-effective provider of property and casualty
insurance in the united states. a variety of factors continue to affect the
property and casualty insurance market and the companys core business outlook
for 2006, including increasingly competitive conditions throughout the majority
of markets served by the companys business segments, loss cost trends
(including medical inflation and auto loss costs), asbestos-related
developments and rising reinsurance and litigation costs.
the
company expects property casualty market conditions to continue to be
competitive throughout 2006. relative to
2005, within the commercial and specialty segments, the company expects renewal
price changes to increase and terms, conditions and insured values to improve
for exposures susceptible to catastrophe losses, such as coastal property and
oil and gas-related exposures, while renewal price changes for non-catastrophe
exposures are expected to be subject to modest declines. also relative to 2005, within the personal
segment, the company expects renewal price changes in the automobile market to
remain relatively stable or decline modestly, while the homeowners market is
expected to remain relatively stable.
the company expects that the trend of increased severity and frequency
of storms experienced in 2005 and 2004 will continue into 2006. given the
increased severity and frequency of storms, the company is reassessing its
definition of and exposure to coastal risks, as well as the impact, if any, on
its reinsurance program. accordingly,
the company is reviewing its pricing, exposures, return thresholds and terms
and conditions it offers in coastal areas. in part as a result of the severity
and frequency of storms in 2005 and 2004, the company expects the cost of
reinsurance to increase, and there may be reduced availability of reinsurance
coverage. to the extent that the company
is not able to reflect the potentially increased costs of increased severity
and frequency of storms or reinsurance in its pricing, the companys results of
operations will be adversely impacted.
in particular, in the personal segment, the company expects a delay in
its ability to increase pricing to offset these potentially increased costs
since the company cannot increase rates to the extent necessary without the
approval of the regulatory authorities of certain states. also, particularly in light of the frequency
and severity of storms in the past two years, rating agencies may increase
their capital requirements for the company.
with respect to non-catastrophe claim frequency, the industry has
experienced unprecedented low levels over the last several years, a trend that the
company does not expect to change materially in 2006. the company expects severity trend, the other
component of loss trend, to continue to remain stable for non-catastrophe
claims. nevertheless, with continued pressure on pricing, it is possible that
margins will contract in certain parts of the companys business in 2006.
changes
in the general interest rate environment affect the returns available on new
investments. while a rising interest rate environment enhances the returns
available on new fixed income investments, it reduces the market value of
existing fixed maturity investments and the availability of gains on
disposition. a decline in interest rates reduces the returns available on new
investments but increases the market value of existing investments and the
availability of realized investment gains on disposition. in 2005, short-term
interest rates continued to increase, while long-term interest rates remained consistent
with 2004 levels. consequently, yields available on new investments began to
grow, but remained below the existing portfolios average book yield. the continuation
of an upward trend in interest rates in 2006 would favorably impact the average
book yield of the companys fixed income holdings.
as
required by various state laws and regulations, the companys insurance
subsidiaries are subject to assessments from state-administered guaranty
associations, second-injury funds and similar associations. in the opinion of
the companys management, these assessments will not have a material impact on
the companys results of operations.
some
social, economic, political and litigation issues have led to an increased
number of legislative and regulatory proposals aimed at addressing the cost and
availability of some types of insurance as well as the claim and coverage
obligations of insurers. while most of these provisions have failed to become
law, these initiatives may continue as legislators and regulators consider
responses to consumer concerns about availability, affordability and claims
handling and coverage, and the resulting laws and regulations, if any, could
adversely affect the companys ability to write business with appropriate
returns.
on november26, 2002, the terrorism risk insurance act of 2002
(the terrorism act) was enacted into federal law and established the terrorism
risk insurance program (the program), a temporary federal program in the
department of the treasury, that provided for a system of shared public and
private compensation for insured losses resulting from acts of terrorism or war
committed by or on behalf of a foreign interest. the program was scheduled to
terminate on december31, 2005. on december22, 2005, the
terrorism risk insurance extension act of 2005 (the terrorism extension act)
was enacted into federal law, reauthorizing the program through december31,
2007, while reducing the federal role under the program. in order for a loss to
be covered under the program (subject losses), the loss must meet certain
aggregate industry loss minimums that vary by program year of amounts $100
million or less, and must be the result of an event that is certified as an act
of terrorism by the u.s. secretary of the treasury. the original program excluded from
participation certain of the following types of insurance: federal crop
insurance, private mortgage insurance, financial guaranty insurance, medical
malpractice insurance, health or life insurance, flood insurance, and
reinsurance. the terrorism extension act
exempted from coverage certain additional types of insurance, including
commercial automobile, professional liability (other than directors and
officers), surety, burglary and theft, and farm-owners multi-peril. in
the case of a war declared by congress, only workers compensation losses are
covered by the terrorism act and the terrorism extension act. both acts
generally require that all commercial property casualty insurers licensed in
the united states participate in the program. under the program, a
participating insurer is entitled to be reimbursed by the federal government
for a percentage of subject losses, after an insurer deductible, subject to an
annual cap. the federal reimbursement percentage remains at 90% for 2006,
but decreases to 85% in 2007. in each case, the deductible is calculated
by applying the deductible percentage to the insurers direct earned premiums
for covered lines from the calendar year immediately preceding the applicable
year. the deductible
under the program was 7% for 2003, 10% for 2004 and 15% for 2005, and
will be 17.5% for 2006 and 20% for 2007. the companys estimated
deductible under the program is $1.91 billion for 2006. the annual cap
limits the amount of aggregate subject losses for all participating insurers to
$100 billion. once subject losses have reached the $100 billion aggregate
during a program year, there is no additional reimbursement from the u.s.
treasury and an insurer that has met its deductible for the program year is not
liable for any losses (or portion thereof) that exceed the $100 billion cap.
the company had no terrorism-related losses in 2005, 2004 or 2003.
while the terrorism acts provide a
federally-funded backstop for commercial property casualty insurers, they
also require that insurers offer coverage for insured losses caused by acts of
terrorism. the majority of the companys commercial and specialty policies
already included such coverage, although exclusions were added to higher-risk
policyholders after september11, 2001. for those risks considered
higher-risk, such as landmark buildings or high concentrations of employees in
one location, the company will continue to either decline to offer a renewal or
will offer coverage for losses caused by acts of terrorism on a limited basis,
with an explicit charge for the coverage.
there
are currently various state and federal legislative and judicial proposals to
require asbestos claimants to demonstrate an asbestos illness. at this time it
is not possible to predict the likelihood or timing of such proposals being
enacted or the effect if they are enacted. the companys ongoing analysis of
its asbestos reserves did not assume the adoption of any asbestos reforms. for
information about the outlook with respect to asbestos-related claims and
liabilities see asbestos claims and litigation and uncertainty regarding
adequacy of asbestos and environmental reserves.
liquidity and capital resources
liquidity is a measure of a companys ability to generate sufficient
cash flows to meet the short- and long-term cash requirements of its business
operations. the liquidity requirements
of the companys business have been met primarily by funds generated from
operations, asset maturities and income received on investments. cash provided from these sources is used
primarily for claims and claim adjustment expense payments and operating
expenses. the timing and amount of
catastrophe claims are inherently unpredictable. such claims, including those associated with
hurricanes katrina, rita and wilma, increase liquidity requirements. the timing and amount of reinsurance
recoveries may be affected by reinsurer solvency and reinsurance coverage
disputes. additionally, the volatility of
asbestos-related claim payments, as well as potential judgments and settlements
arising out of litigation, may also result in increased liquidity
requirements. it is the opinion
of the companys management that the companys future liquidity needs will be
adequately met from all of the above sources.
net
cash flows provided by operating activities of continuing operations totaled
$3.59 billion, $5.07 billion and $3.83 billion in 2005, 2004 and 2003,
respectively. cash flows in 2005
reflected an increase in loss and loss adjustment expense payments primarily
related to the catastrophe losses incurred during 2005 and 2004, and an
increase in tax payments resulting from higher profitability. cash flows in 2004 included $867 million in
cash proceeds received pursuant to the commutation of specific reinsurance
agreements in the second quarter described previously. cash flows in 2004 also
benefited from premium rate and volume increases. the significant reserve
adjustments recorded subsequent to the merger in 2004 did not materially impact
2004 cash flows. the company utilized $2.00 billion and $548 million of net
operating loss carryforwards (nol) during 2005 and 2004, respectively, thereby
reducing current regular tax payments by $698 million and $192 million,
respectively. net cash flows provided by
operating activities in 2003 benefited from premium rate increases and the
receipt of $361 million from citigroup,inc., a former affiliate, and $531
million of federal income taxes refunded from the companys net operating loss
carryback.
net
cash flows provided by operating activities for all three years were negatively
impacted by payments for asbestos and environmental liabilities. cash flows from operating activities in 2005
and 2004 were also negatively impacted by payments related to the companys
runoff operations. included in the companys structured agreement component of
asbestos loss reserves at december31, 2005 was $404 million (net of
reinsurance) for the companys single payment contribution to the proposed
settlement related to ppg, and $502 million for the companys settlement of the
statutory and hawaii actions and the common law claims. although each of these
settlements is subject to certain contingencies or final orders and relief as
previously discussed, it is possible that these settlement amounts will be paid
in 2006.
net
cash flows used in investing activities of continuing operations totaled $3.04
billion, $4.65 billion and $2.48 billion in 2005, 2004 and 2003, respectively.
fixed maturity securities accounted for the majority of investment purchases in
all three years. in 2003, cash used in investing activities was partly offset
by sales of securities to fund net payment activity related to debt and junior
subordinated debt securities held by subsidiary trusts of $772 million.
the companys cash flows in 2005 included $2.40 billion of pretax
proceeds (after underwriting fees and transaction costs) from the divestiture
of its equity interest in nuveen investments.
of this amount, $405 million was received directly by the companys
insurance subsidiaries, and the remainder was received directly by the holding
company. of the proceeds received
directly by the holding company, $1.225 billion was contributed to the capital
of the companys insurance subsidiaries, with the remainder available for
general corporate purposes. holding
company liquidity levels were increased in 2005 through dividends received from
the companys operating subsidiaries, the retained proceeds from the nuveen
investments divestiture, the third quarter 2005 proceeds of $442 million from
the settlement of the forward purchase contracts for the companys common stock
related to equity units issued in 2002 (described in more detail below), and
the fourth quarter issuance of $400 million of 5.50% senior notes. net cash flows of discontinued operations were
not significant in 2005 or 2004.
the majority of funds available for investment are deployed in a widely
diversified portfolio of high quality, liquid intermediate-term taxable u.s.
government, corporate and mortgage backed bonds and tax-exempt u.s. municipal
bonds. the company closely monitors the
duration of its fixed maturity investments, and investment purchases and sales
are executed with the objective of having adequate funds available to satisfy
the companys insurance and debt obligations.
the companys management of the duration of the fixed income investment
portfolio generally produces a duration that exceeds the duration of the
companys net insurance liabilities. as
the companys investment strategy focuses on asset and liability durations, and
not specific cash flows, asset sales may be required to satisfy obligations
and/or rebalance asset portfolios. the
average duration of fixed maturities and short-term securities was 3.9 years at
december31, 2005, compared with 4.1 years at december31, 2004.
the
company also invests much smaller amounts in equity securities, venture capital
and real estate. these investment classes have the potential for higher returns
but also involve varying degrees of risk, including less stable rates of return
and less liquidity.
the primary goals of the companys asset liability management process
are to satisfy the insurance liabilities, manage the interest rate risk
embedded in those insurance liabilities, and maintain sufficient liquidity to
cover fluctuations in projected liability cash flows. generally, the expected principal and
interest payments produced by the companys fixed income portfolio adequately
fund the estimated runoff of the companys insurance reserves. although this is not an exact cash flow match
in each period, the substantial degree by which the market value of the fixed
income portfolio exceeds the present value of the net insurance liabilities,
plus the positive cash flow from newly sold policies and the large amount of
high quality liquid bonds provides assurance of the companys ability to fund
the payment of claims without having to sell illiquid assets or access credit
facilities.
at december31,
2005, total cash, short-term invested assets and other readily marketable securities
aggregating $1.57 billion were held at the holding company level. these assets were primarily funded by
dividends from subsidiaries, proceeds from the divestiture of nuveen
investments, and proceeds from the issuance of common stock and debt as described
below. as also noted above, the holding
company contributed $1.225 billion of the nuveen investment proceeds to the
capital of its insurance subsidiaries in the third quarter of 2005. the assets held at the holding company,
combined with other sources of funds available, primarily additional dividends
from operating subsidiaries, are considered sufficient to meet the liquidity
requirements of the company. these
liquidity requirements primarily include shareholder dividends and debt
service.
net
cash flows used in financing activities of continuing operations totaled $473
million, $516 million and $1.10 billion in 2005, 2004 and 2003, respectively.
in 2005, the company repaid $815 million of its outstanding debt, primarily
comprised of the following: maturities of $238 million of 7.875% senior notes,
$79 million of 7.125% senior notes, and $99 million of medium-term notes
bearing interest rates ranging from 6.44% to 7.09%; and a net repayment of
commercial paper borrowings of $395 million.
in november2005, the company issued $400 million of 5.50% senior
notes maturing in december2015.
the majority of proceeds was used to fund the repayment of commercial
paper borrowings, with the remainder used for general corporate purposes.
in
july2002, concurrent with the issuance of 17.8 million of spc common
shares in a public offering, spc issued 8.9 million equity units, each having a
stated amount of $50, for gross consideration of $442 million. each equity unit initially consisted of a
forward purchase contract for the companys common stock, which matured in august2005,
and an unsecured $50 senior note of the company (maturing in 2007). total annual distributions on the equity
units were at the rate of 9.00%, consisting of interest on the note at a rate
of 5.25% and fee payments under the forward contract of 3.75%. holders of the equity units had the
opportunity to participate in a required remarketing of the senior note
component. the initial remarketing date
was may11, 2005. on that date, the
notes were successfully remarketed, and the interest rate on the notes was
reset to 5.01%, from 5.25%, effective may16, 2005. the remarketed notes mature on august16,
2007. the forward purchase contract
required the investor to purchase, for $50, a variable number of shares of the
companys common stock on the settlement date of august16, 2005. the number of shares purchased was determined
based on a formula that considered the average closing price of the companys
common stock on each of 20 consecutive trading days ending on the third trading
day immediately preceding the settlement date, in relation to the $24.20 per
share price of common stock at the time of the offering. on the august16, 2005 settlement date,
the company issued 15.2 million common shares and received total proceeds of
$442 million.
net
maturities and retirements of debt, including the repurchase of commercial
insurance resources,inc.s (ciri) outstanding notes, totaled $75 million
in 2004. in addition, the company repurchased the minority interest in ciri
during 2004 for a total cost of $76 million. cash flows used in financing
activities in 2003 included the redemption of $900 million aggregate principal
amount of junior subordinated debt securities held by subsidiary trusts, the
repayment of $700 million of notes payable to a former affiliate and the
repayment of $550 million of short-term debt. funds used in these repayments
were primarily provided by the companys issuance of $1.40 billion of senior
notes in march2003 and by cash flows provided by operating activities.
these refinancing activities were initiated with the objective of lowering the
average interest rate on the companys total outstanding debt. also reflected in
2003 was the issuance of $550 million of short-term floating rate notes which
were used to repay the $550 million promissory note due in january2004.
dividends paid to shareholders totaled $628 million, $642 million and
$282 million in 2005, 2004 and 2003, respectively. the companys $636
million of common dividends in 2004 were comprised of regular quarterly
dividends totaling $522 million and $114 million that had been declared by spc
prior to the merger. that amount consisted of spcs regular quarterly dividend
at a rate of $0.29 per share ($66 million), and a special $0.21 per share ($48
million) dividend related to the merger. the special dividend declared by spc
prior to the closing of the merger was designed to result in the holders of spcs
common stock prior to the merger receiving aggregate dividends with record
dates in 2004 of $1.16 per share, which was spcs indicated annual dividend
rate prior to the merger. on february7, 2006, the companys board of
directors declared a quarterly dividend of $0.23 per share, payable march31,
2006 to shareholders of record on march10, 2006.
the
declaration and payment of future dividends to holders of the companys common
stock will be at the discretion of the companys board of directors and will
depend upon many factors, including the companys financial condition,
earnings, capital requirements of the companys operating subsidiaries, legal
requirements, regulatory constraints and other factors as the board of
directors deems relevant. dividends would be paid by the company only if
declared by its board of directors out of funds legally available, subject to
any other restrictions that may be applicable to the company.
in
2005 and 2004, the company acquired 0.8 million and 0.4 million shares, respectively,
of common stock from employees as treasury stock primarily to cover payroll
withholding taxes in connection with the vesting of restricted stock awards and
exercises of stock options. in 2003, tpc repurchased approximately 1.1 million
shares (as adjusted for the merger) of common stock at a total cost of $40
million, representing the acquisition of shares under a repurchase program that
had been approved by tpcs board of directors. tpcs repurchase program was
terminated upon completion of the merger.
upon
completion of the merger on april1, 2004, the company acquired all
obligations related to spcs outstanding debt, which had a carrying value of
$3.68 billion at the time of the merger. in accordance with purchase
accounting, the carrying value of the spc debt acquired was adjusted to market
value as of april1, 2004 using the effective interest rate method, which
resulted in a $301 million adjustment to increase the amount of the companys
consolidated debt outstanding. that fair value adjustment is being amortized
over the remaining life of the respective debt instruments acquired. that
amortization, which totaled $54 million in 2005 and $55 million in 2004,
reduced reported interest expense.
debt
and convertible notes payable outstanding were as follows:
(at december31, in millions)
short-term:
commercial paper
$
$
medium-term notes maturing in following
year
6.75% senior notes due november15,
7.875% senior notes due april15, 2005
7.125% senior notes due june1, 2005
total
short-term debt
long-term:
medium-term notes with various maturities
through 2010
6.75% senior notes due november15,
5.75% senior notes due march15, 2007
5.01%* senior notes due august16,
5.25%* senior notes due august16,
3.75% senior notes due march15, 2008
zero coupon convertible notes due 2009
8.125% senior notes due april15, 2010
7.81% private placement notes due on
various dates through 2011
5.00% senior notes due march15, 2013
5.50% senior notes due december1,
7.75% senior notes due april15, 2026
7.625% subordinated debentures due december15,
8.47% subordinated debentures due january10,
4.50% convertible junior subordinated notes
payable due april15, 2032
6.375% senior notes due march15, 2033
8.50% subordinated debentures due december15,
8.312% subordinated debentures due july1,
7.60% subordinated debentures due october15,
total
long-term debt
5,393
5,198
total debt
principal
5,703
6,113
unamortized fair value adjustment
unamortized debt issuance costs
(38
)
(39
)
total debt
$
5,850
$
6,313
* these senior notes had an interest rate of
5.25% at december31, 2004. the
interest rate was reset to 5.01% in may2005 pursuant to the remarketing
of these notes as described below.
the
company has the option to defer interest payments on its convertible junior
subordinated notes for a period not exceeding 20 consecutive quarterly interest
periods. if the company elects to defer interest payments on the notes, it will
not be permitted, with limited exceptions, to pay dividends on its common stock
during a deferral period.
in
november2005, the company issued $400 million of 5.50% senior notes due december1,
2015. the notes pay interest
semi-annually on june1 and december1 of each year, beginning june1,
2006, are senior unsecured obligations and rank equally with all of the companys
other senior unsecured indebtedness. the company may redeem some or all of the
notes prior to maturity at a redemption price equal to the greater of: 100% of
the principal amount of senior notes to be redeemed; or the sum of the present
values of the remaining scheduled payments of principal and interest on the
senior notes to be redeemed (exclusive of interest accrued to the date of
redemption) discounted to the date of redemption on a semiannual basis at the
then current treasury rate plus 20 basis points. the majority of the proceeds was used to pay
down the companys commercial paper outstanding, with the remainder used for
general corporate purposes.
on
march11, 2003, tpc issued $1.40 billion of senior notes comprising $400
million of 3.75% senior notes due march15, 2008, $500 million of 5.00%
senior notes due march15, 2013 and $500 million of 6.375% senior notes
due march15, 2033. the notes pay interest semi-annually on march15
and september15 of each year, beginning september15, 2003, are
senior unsecured obligations and rank equally with all of tpcs other senior
unsecured indebtedness. tpc may redeem some or all of the notes prior to maturity
by paying a make-whole premium based on u.s. treasury rates. the net proceeds
from the sale of these notes were contributed to its primary subsidiary,
travelers insurance group holdings,inc. (tighi), so that tighi could
prepay and refinance $500 million of 3.60% indebtedness to citigroup and redeem
$900 million aggregate principal amount of tighis 8.00% to 8.08% junior
subordinated debt securities held by subsidiary trusts. these trusts, in turn,
used these funds to redeem $900 million of preferred capital securities on april9,
2003.
these
senior notes were sold to qualified institutional buyers as defined under rule144a
under the securities act of 1933 (the securities act) and outside the united
states in reliance on regulation s under the securities act. accordingly, the
notes (the restricted notes) were not registered under the securities act or
any state securities laws and could not be transferred or resold except
pursuant to certain exemptions. as part of this offering, tpc agreed to file a
registration statement under the securities act to permit the exchange of the
notes for registered notes (the exchange notes) having terms identical to those
of the senior notes described above (exchange offer). on april14, 2003,
tpc initiated the exchange offer pursuant to a forms-4 that was filed
with the securities and exchange commission. accordingly, each series of
exchange notes has been registered under the securities act, and the transfer
restrictions and registration rights relating to the restricted notes do not
apply to the exchange notes.
line of credit agreements. the company maintains an $800 million
commercial paper program with back-up liquidity consisting of a bank credit
agreement. in june2005, the company entered into a $1.0 billion,
five-year revolving credit agreement with a syndicate of financial
institutions. the new credit agreement
replaced and consolidated the companys three prior bank credit agreements that had collectively provided the company access
to $1.0 billion of bank credit lines.
pursuant to covenants in the new credit agreement, the company must
maintain an excess of consolidated net worth over goodwill and other intangible
assets of not less than $10 billion at all times. the company must also maintain a ratio
of total consolidated debt to the sum of total consolidated debt plus
consolidated net worth of not greater than 0.40 to 1.00. in addition, the credit agreement contains
other customary restrictive covenants as well as certain customary events of
default, including with respect to a change in control. at december31, 2005, the company was in
compliance with these covenants and all other covenants related to its
respective debt instruments outstanding.
pursuant to the terms of the credit agreement, the company has an option
to increase the credit available under the facility, no more than once a year,
up to a maximum facility amount of $1.5 billion, subject to the satisfaction of
a ratings requirement and certain other conditions. there was no amount outstanding under the
credit agreement as of december31, 2005.
shelf
registration. in december2005,
the company filed with the securities and exchange commission a shelf
registration statement for the potential offering and sale of securities. the company may offer these securities from
time to time at prices and on other terms to be determined at the time of
offering.
contractual obligations
the
following table excludes short-term obligations. the table also excludes
estimated cash flows of claim and claim related payments, which are presented
in the table that follows. the contractual obligations, which include only
liabilities at december31, 2005 with a cash payment requirement for
settlement, were as follows:
payments due by period
(in millions)
total
less
than
year
1-3
years
3-5
years
after 5
years
debt(1)
medium term
notes
$
$
$
$
$
convertible
notes
senior notes
3,342
1,342
1,600
capital
trusts
zero coupon
convertible notes
private
placement notes
total
debt
5,618
1,569
3,423
operating leases(2)
purchase obligations
information
systems administration and maintenance commitments(3)
reinsurance
brokerage commitment(4)
other
purchase commitments(5)
total
purchase obligations
long-term liabilities
unfunded
investment commitments(6)
total
long-term liabilities
total contractual obligations
$
7,642
$
$
2,326
$
$
3,792
(1) see note 10 of the notes to the companys consolidated financial
statements for a further discussion.
(2) represents agreements entered into in the ordinary course of business
to lease office space, equipment and furniture.
(3) includes agreements with vendors to purchase system software
administration and maintenance services.
(4) in connection with the sale of its insurance brokerage operations, the
company committed to acquire brokerage services from the buyer through 2012.
see note 17.
(5) includes commitments to vendors entered into in the ordinary course of
business for goods and services including office supplies, archival services,
etc.
(6) represents estimated timing for fulfilling unfunded commitments for
investments in real estate partnerships, private equities and hedge funds.
the
company is not required to make any contributions to its qualified pension plan
in 2006 and does not have a best estimate of contributions expected to be paid
to the qualified pension plan. accordingly, any future contributions are not
included in the foregoing contractual obligation table.
estimated claims and claim related payments
the
table below presents the amount and estimated future timing of claims and claim
related payments. the amounts do not represent the exact liability, but instead
represent estimates, generally utilizing actuarial projections techniques, at a
given accounting date. these estimates include expectations of what the
ultimate settlement and administration of claims will cost based on the companys
assessment of facts and circumstances then known, review of historical
settlement patterns, estimates of trends in claims severity, frequency, legal
theories of liability and other factors. variables in the reserve estimation
process can be affected by both internal and external events, such as changes
in claims handling procedures, economic inflation, legal trends and legislative
changes. many of these items are not directly quantifiable, particularly on a
prospective basis. additionally, there may be significant reporting lags
between the occurrence of the policyholder event and the time it is actually
reported to the insurer. the future cash flows related to the items contained
in the table below, required estimation of both amount (including severity
considerations) and timing. amount and timing are frequently estimated
separately. an estimation of both amount and timing of future cash flows
related to claims and claim related payments is generally reliable only in the
aggregate with some unavoidable estimation uncertainty.
the
following table includes estimated future claims and claims related payments,
net of the estimated reinsurance recoveries, where applicable, at december31,
2005.
estimated payments by period
(in millions)
total
less
than 1
year
1-3
years
3-5
years
after 5
years
estimated future payments resulting from:
(1)claims
and claim adjustmentexpenses
$
43,782
$
12,203
$
13,693
$
6,375
$
11,511
(2)claims
from large deductible polices
(3)loss-based
assessments
(4)reinsurance
contracts accounted for as deposits
(5)payout
from ceded funds withheld
total
$
44,926
$
12,390
$
14,153
$
6,534
$
11,849
(1) the amounts in claims and claim adjustment expenses in the table
above represent the estimated timing of future payments for both reported and
unreported claims incurred and related claim adjustment expenses, net of
reinsurance recoverables. therefore, estimated future payments include cash
inflows related to reinsurance arrangements that qualify for reinsurance
accounting. a reinsurance agreement must indemnify the insurer from insurance
risk, i.e., the agreement must transfer amount and timing risk, in order to
qualify for reinsurance accounting.
since the timing and amount of cash inflows from such reinsurance
agreements are highly correlated to the underlying payment of claims and claim
adjustment expenses by the insurer, the analysis above presents the estimated
cash outflows for reported and unreported claims incurred and related claim
adjustment expense, net of reinsurance. reinsurance agreements that do not
transfer both amount and timing risk are accounted for as deposits and included
in reinsurance contracts accounted for as deposits in the table above.
for business underwritten by non-u.s. operations, future cash flows
related to reported and unreported claims incurred and related claim adjustment
expenses were translated at the spot rate on december31, 2005.
the amounts reported in the table are presented on a nominal basis and
have not been adjusted to reflect the time value of money. accordingly, the
amounts above will differ from the companys balance sheet to the extent that
the liability for claims and claim adjustment expenses has been discounted in
the balance sheet. (see note 1 of the financial statements.)
(2) workers compensation large deductible policies provide third party
coverage in which the company typically is responsible for paying the entire
loss under such policies and then seeks reimbursement from the insured for the
deductible amount. claims from large deductible policies represent the
estimated future payment for claims and claim related expenses below the
deductible amount, net of the estimated recovery of the deductible. the
liability and the related deductible receivable for unpaid claims are presented
in the consolidated balance sheet as contractholder payables and contractholder
receivables, respectively. most deductibles for such policies are paid
directly from the policyholders escrow which is periodically replenished by
the policyholder. the payment of the loss amounts above the deductible are
reported within claims and claim adjustment expenses in the above table.
because the timing of the collection of the deductible (contractholder
receivables) occurs shortly after the payment of the deductible to a claimant
(contractholder payables), these cash flows offset each other in the table.
the estimated timing of the payment of the contractholder payables and
the collection of contractholder receivables for workers compensation policies
is presented below:
(in millions)
total
lessthan1
year
1-3
years
3-5
years
after5
years
contractholder payables/ receivables
$
5,516
$
1,362
$
1,492
$
$
1,907
(3) the amounts in loss-based assessments relate to estimated future
payments of second-injury fund assessments which would result from payment of
current claim liabilities. second injury funds cover the cost of any additional
benefits for aggravation of a pre-existing condition. for loss-based
assessments, the cost is shared by the insurance industry and self-insureds,
funded through assessments to insurance companies and self-insureds based on
losses. amounts relating to second-injury fund assessments are included in other
liabilities in the consolidated balance sheet.
(4) the amounts in reinsurance contracts accounted for as deposits
represent estimated future nominal payments for reinsurance agreements that are
accounted for as deposits. amounts payable under deposit agreements are
included in other liabilities in the consolidated balance sheet. the amounts
reported in the table are presented on a nominal basis and have not been
adjusted to reflect the time value of money. accordingly, the amounts above
will differ from the companys balance sheet to the extent that deposit values
in the balance sheet have been discounted using deposit accounting.
(5) the amounts in payouts from ceded funds
withheld represent estimated payments for losses and return of funds held
related to certain reinsurance arrangements whereby the company holds a portion
of the premium due to the reinsurer and is allowed to pay claims from the
amounts held.
the
above table does not include an analysis of liabilities reported for structured
settlements for which the company has purchased annuities and remains
contingently liable in the event of default by the company issuing the annuity.
the company is not reasonably likely to incur future payment obligations under
such agreements. see note 9 of the companys consolidated financial statements
for a further discussion.
dividend availability
the
companys principal insurance subsidiaries are domiciled in the states of
connecticut and minnesota. the insurance holding company laws of both states
applicable to the companys subsidiaries requires notice to, and approval by,
the state insurance commissioner for the declaration or payment of any
dividend, that together with other distributions made within the preceding
twelve months, exceeds the greater of 10% of the insurers capital and surplus
as of the preceding december31, or the insurers net income for the
twelve-month period ending the preceding december31, in each case
determined in accordance with statutory accounting practices and by state
regulation. this declaration or payment is further limited by adjusted
unassigned surplus, as determined in accordance with statutory accounting
practices.
the
insurance holding company laws of other states in which the companys
subsidiaries are domiciled generally contain similar, although in some
instances somewhat more restrictive, limitations on the payment of dividends. a
maximum of $2.56 billion is available by the end of 2006 for such dividends
without prior approval of the connecticut insurance department for
connecticut-domiciled subsidiaries and the minnesota department of commerce for
minnesota-domiciled subsidiaries. the company received $968 million of
dividends from its insurance subsidiaries in 2005.
risk-based capital
the
naic adopted rbc requirements for property casualty companies to be used as
minimum capital requirements by the naic and states to identify companies that
merit further regulatory action. the formulas have not been designed to
differentiate among adequately capitalized companies that operate with levels
of capital higher than rbc requirements. therefore, it is inappropriate and
ineffective to use the formulas to rate or to rank these companies. at december31,
2005, all of the companys insurance subsidiaries had adjusted capital in
excess of amounts requiring any company or regulatory action.
off-balance sheet arrangements
the
company has entered into certain contingent obligations for guarantees related
to agency loans and letters of credit, issuance of debt securities, third party
loans related to venture capital investments and various indemnifications
related to the sale of business entities to third parties. see note 17 to the
companys consolidated financial statements. the company does not expect these
arrangements to have a material effect on the companys financial condition,
changes in financial condition, revenues and expenses, results of operations,
liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.
critical accounting estimates
the
company considers its most significant accounting estimates to be those applied
to claim and claim adjustment expense reserves and related reinsurance
recoverables, and investment impairments.
claim and claim adjustment expense reserves
claim
and claim adjustment expense reserves (loss reserves) represent managements
estimate of ultimate unpaid costs of losses and loss adjustment expenses for
claims that have been reported and claims that have been incurred but not yet
reported. loss reserves do not represent an exact calculation of liability, but
instead represent management estimates, generally utilizing actuarial expertise
and projection techniques, at a given accounting date. these loss reserve
estimates are expectations of what the ultimate settlement and administration
of claims will cost upon final resolution in the future, based on the companys
assessment of facts and circumstances then known, review of historical
settlement patterns, estimates of trends in claims severity and frequency,
expected interpretations of legal theories of liability and other factors. in
establishing reserves, the company also takes into account estimated
recoveries, reinsurance, salvage and subrogation. the reserves are reviewed
regularly by a qualified actuary employed by the company.
the
process of estimating loss reserves involves a high degree of judgment and is
subject to a number of variables. these variables can be affected by both
internal and external events, such as changes in claims handling procedures,
economic inflation, legal trends and legislative changes, among others. the
impact of many of these items on ultimate costs for loss and loss adjustment
expenses is difficult to estimate. loss reserve estimation difficulties also
differ significantly by product line due to differences in claim complexity,
the volume of claims, the potential severity of individual claims, the
determination of occurrence date for a claim and reporting lags (the time
between the occurrence of the policyholder event and when it is actually
reported to the insurer). informed judgment is applied throughout the process.
the company continually refines its loss reserve estimates in a regular ongoing
process as historical loss experience develops and additional claims are
reported and settled. the company rigorously attempts to consider all
significant facts and circumstances known at the time loss reserves are
established. due to the inherent uncertainty underlying loss reserve estimates
including but not limited to the future settlement environment, final
resolution of the estimated liability will be different from that anticipated
at the reporting date. therefore, actual paid losses in the future may yield a
materially different amount than currently reservedfavorable or unfavorable.
because
establishment of loss reserves is an inherently uncertain process involving
estimates, currently established reserves may change. the company reflects
adjustments to reserves in the results of operations in the period the
estimates are changed.
there
are also risks which impact the estimation of ultimate costs for
catastrophes. for example, the
estimation of reserves related to hurricanes can be affected by the inability
of the company and its insureds to access portions of the impacted areas, the
complexity of factors contributing to the losses, the legal and regulatory
uncertainties and the nature of the information available to establish the
reserves. complex factors include, but
are not limited to: determining whether damage was caused by flooding versus
wind; evaluating general liability and pollution exposures; estimating
additional living expenses; the impact of demand surge; infrastructure
disruption; fraud; the effect of mold damage and business interruption costs;
and reinsurance collectibility. the
timing of a catastrophes occurrence, such as at or near the end of a reporting
period, can also affect the information available to the company in estimating
reserves for that reporting period. the
estimates related to catastrophes are adjusted as actual claims emerge.
a
portion of the companys loss reserves are for asbestos and environmental
claims and related litigation which aggregated $4.79 billion at december31,
2005. while the ongoing study of asbestos claims and associated liabilities and
of environmental claims considers the inconsistencies of court decisions as to
coverage, plaintiffs expanded theories of liability and the risks inherent in
complex litigation and other uncertainties, in the opinion of the companys
management, it is possible that the outcome of the continued uncertainties
regarding these claims could result in liability in future periods that differs
from current reserves by an amount that could be material to the companys
future operating results and financial condition. see the preceding discussion
of asbestos claims and litigation and environmental claims and litigation.
the
company acquired spcs runoff health care reserves in the merger, which are
included in the general liability product line in the table below. spc decided to exit this market at the end of
2001 and ceased underwriting new business as quickly as regulatory
considerations allowed. spc had
experienced significant adverse loss development on its health care loss
reserves both prior to and since its decision to exit this market. the company continues to utilize specific
tools and metrics to explicitly monitor and validate its key assumptions
supporting its conclusions with regard to these reserves since management
believed that its traditional statistics and reserving methods needed to be
supplemented in order to provide a more meaningful analysis. the tools developed track three primary
indicators which influence those conclusions and include: newly reported
claims; reserve development on known claims; and the redundancy ratio, which
compares the cost of resolving claims to the reserve established for that
individual claim. these three indicators
are related such that if one deteriorates, improvement on another is necessary
for the company to conclude that further reserve strengthening is not
necessary. the companys current view is
that it has recorded a reasonable reserve for its medical malpractice exposures
as of december31, 2005.
claims
and claim adjustment expense reserves by product line were as follows:
(at december31, in millions)
case
ibnr
total
case
ibnr
total
general
liability
$
8,198
$
12,251
$
20,449
$
8,445
$
12,232
$
20,677
property
1,987
1,050
3,037
1,534
1,359
2,893
commercial
multi-peril
2,448
2,901
5,349
1,979
2,216
4,195
commercial
automobile
2,792
1,885
4,677
2,817
1,966
4,783
workers
compensation
8,816
6,374
15,190
8,313
6,658
14,971
fidelity and
surety
1,240
1,913
1,216
2,061
personal
automobile
1,470
1,138
2,608
1,484
1,219
2,703
homeowners
and personalother
1,696
international
and other
3,033
3,055
6,088
2,934
2,774
5,708
property-casualty
30,693
30,314
61,007
29,192
29,792
58,984
accident and
health
claims
and claim adjustment expense reserves
$
30,767
$
30,323
$
61,090
$
29,268
$
29,802
$
59,070
the $2.02 billion increase in property-casualty claims and claim
adjustment expense reserves since december31, 2004 reflected the impact
of the significant catastrophe losses incurred in the second half of 2005 and
the $830 million net charge to increase asbestos reserves in the fourth quarter
of 2005. these increases in reserves
were partially offset by claim and claim expense payments from runoff
operations, loss payouts for the third quarter 2004 hurricanes, and favorable
non-catastrophe loss experience.
property-casualty
claims and claim adjustment expense reserves at december31, 2004
increased by $24.51 billion over year-end 2003, primarily as a result of the
merger with spc and reserve charges recorded subsequent to the merger. of the
increase in 2004, $19.50 billion resulted from the addition of the acquired
reserves, and $2.39 billion, net of reinsurance, was due to net unfavorable
prior year reserve development. for
discussion of the components of net unfavorable prior year reserve development,
see note 9 to the consolidated financial statements.
asbestos
and environmental reserves are included in the general liability, commercial
multi-peril lines and international and other lines in the summary table.
asbestos and environmental reserves are discussed separately, see asbestos
claims and litigation, environmental claims and litigation and uncertainty
regarding adequacy of asbestos and environmental reserves.
general discussion
the
process for estimating the liabilities for claim and claim expenses begins with
the collection and analysis of claim data. data on individual reported claims,
both current and historical, including paid amounts and individual claim
adjuster estimates, are grouped by common characteristics (components) and
evaluated by actuaries in their analyses of ultimate claim liabilities by
product line. such data is occasionally supplemented with external data as
available and when appropriate. the process of analyzing reserves for a
component is undertaken on a regular basis, generally quarterly, in light of
continually updated information.
multiple
estimation methods are available for the analysis of ultimate claim
liabilities. each estimation method has its own set of assumption variables and
its own advantages and disadvantages, with no single estimation method being
better than the others in all situations and no one set of assumption variables
being meaningful for all product line components. the relative strengths and
weaknesses of the particular estimation methods when applied to a particular
group of claims can also change over time. therefore, the actual choice of
estimation method(s) can change with each evaluation. the estimation method(s)
chosen are those that are believed to produce the most reliable indication at
that particular evaluation date for the claim liabilities being evaluated.
in
most cases, multiple estimation methods will be valid for the particular facts
and circumstances of the claim liabilities being evaluated. this will result in
a range of reasonable estimates for any particular claim liability. the company
uses such range analyses to back test whether previously established estimates
for reserves at the reporting segments are reasonable, given subsequent
information. reported values found to be closer to the endpoints of a range of
reasonable estimates are subject to further detailed reviews. these reviews may
substantiate the validity of managements recorded estimate or lead to a change
in the reported estimate.
the
exact boundary points of these ranges are more qualitative than quantitative in
nature, as no clear line of demarcation exists to determine when the set of
underlying assumptions for an estimation method switches from being reasonable
to unreasonable. as a result, the company does not believe that the endpoints
of these ranges are or would be comparable across companies. in addition,
potential interactions among the different estimation assumptions for different
product lines make the aggregation of individual ranges a highly judgmental and
inexact process.
property
casualty insurance policies are either written on a claims made or on an
occurrence basis. policies written on a claims made basis require that claims
be reported during the policy period. policies that are written on an
occurrence basis require that the insured demonstrate that a loss occurred in
the policy period, even if the insured reports the loss many years later.
most
general liability policies are written on an occurrence basis. these policies
are subject to substantial loss development over time as facts and
circumstances change in the years following the policy issuance. the use of the
occurrence form accounts for much of the reserve development in asbestos and
environmental exposures, and it is also used to provide coverage for
construction general liability, including construction defect. occurrence based
forms of insurance for general liability exposures require substantial
projection of various trends, including future inflation and judicial
interpretations and societal litigation dynamics, among others.
a
key assumption in most actuarial analyses is that past patterns demonstrated in
the data will repeat themselves in the future, absent a material change in the
associated risk factors discussed below. to the extent a material change
affecting the ultimate claim liability is known, such change is quantified to
the extent possible through an analysis of internal company and, if available
and when appropriate, external data. such a measurement is specific to the
facts and circumstances of the particular claim portfolio and the known change
being evaluated. significant structural
changes to the available data, product mix or organization can materially
impact the reserve estimation process.
informed
management judgment is applied throughout the reserving process. this includes
the application, on a consistent basis over time, of various individual
experiences and expertise to multiple sets of data and analyses. in addition to
actuaries, individuals involved with the reserving process also include
underwriting and claims personnel as well as other company management.
therefore, it is quite possible and, generally, likely that management must
consider varying individual viewpoints as part of its estimation of loss
reserves. it is also likely that during periods of significant change, such as
a merger, consistent application of informed judgment becomes even more
complicated and difficult.
the
variables discussed above in this general discussion have different impacts on
reserve estimation uncertainty for a given product line, depending on the
length of the claim tail, the reporting lag, the impact of individual claims
and the complexity of the claim process for a given product line.
product
lines are generally classifiable as either long tail or short tail, based on
the average length of time between the event triggering claims under a policy
and the final resolution of those claims. short tail claims are reported and
settled quickly, resulting in less estimation variability. the longer the time
before final claim resolution, the greater the exposure to estimation risks and
hence the greater the estimation uncertainty.
a
major component of the claim tail is the reporting lag. the reporting lag,
which is the time between the event triggering a claim and the reporting of the
claim to the insurer, makes estimating ibnr inherently more uncertain. in
addition, the greater the reporting lag the greater the proportion of ibnr
claims to the total claim liability for the product line. writing new products
with material reporting lags can result in adding several years worth of ibnr
claim exposure before the reporting lag exposure becomes clearly observable,
thereby increasing the risk associated with pricing and reserving such
products. the most extreme example of claim liabilities with long reporting
lags are asbestos claims.
for
some lines, the impact of large individual claims can be material to the
analysis. these lines are generally referred to as being low frequency/high
severity, while lines without this large claim sensitivity are referred to as
high frequency/low severity. estimates of claim liabilities for low
frequency/high severity lines can be sensitive to a few key assumptions. as a
result, the role of judgment is much greater for these reserve estimates. in
contrast, high frequency/low severity lines tend to have much greater spread of
estimation risk, such that the impact of individual claims are relatively minor
and the range of reasonable reserve estimates is narrower and more stable.
claim
complexity can also greatly affect the estimation process by impacting the number
of assumptions needed to produce the estimate, the potential stability of the
underlying data and claim process and the ability to gain an understanding of
the data. product lines with greater claim complexity, such as for certain
surety and construction exposures, have inherently greater estimation
uncertainty.
actuaries
have to exercise a considerable degree of judgment in the evaluation of all
these factors in their analysis of reserves. the human element in the
application of actuarial judgment is unavoidable when faced with material
uncertainty. different experts will choose different assumptions when faced
with such uncertainty, based on their individual backgrounds, professional
experiences and areas of focus. hence, the estimate selected by the various
actuaries may differ materially from each other.
lastly,
significant structural changes to the available data, product mix or
organization can also materially impact the reserve estimation process. the
merger of tpc and spc resulted in the exposure of each others actuaries and
claim departments to different products, data histories, analysis
methodologies, claim settlement experts, and more robust data when viewed on a
combined basis. this impacted the range of estimates produced by the companys
actuaries, as they reacted to new data, approaches, and sources of expertise to
draw upon. it also resulted in additional levels of uncertainty, as past trends
(that were a function of past products, past claim handling procedures, past
claim departments, and past legal and other experts) may not repeat themselves,
as those items affecting the trends change or evolve due to the merger. this
also increased the potential for material variation in estimates, as experts
can have differing views as to the impact of these frequently evolutionary
changes. events such as mergers increase the inherent uncertainty of reserve
estimates for a period of time, until stable trends reestablish themselves
within the new organization.
risk factors
the
major causes of material uncertainty (risk factors) generally will vary for
each product line, as well as for each separately analyzed component of the
product line. in some cases, such risk factors are explicit assumptions of the
estimation method and in others, they are implicit. for example, a method may
explicitly assume that a certain percentage of claims will close each year, but
will implicitly assume that the legal interpretation of existing contract
language will remain unchanged. actual results will likely vary from
expectations for each of these assumptions, resulting in an ultimate claim
liability that is different from that being estimated currently.
some
risk factors will affect more than one product line. examples include changes
in claim department practices, changes in settlement patterns, regulatory and
legislative actions, court actions, timeliness of claim reporting, state mix of
claimants, and degree of claimant fraud. the extent of the impact of a risk
factor will also vary by components within a product line. individual risk
factors are also subject to interactions with other risk factors within product
line components.
the
effect of a particular risk factor on estimates of claim liabilities cannot be
isolated in most cases. for example, estimates of potential claim settlements
may be impacted by the risk associated with potential court rulings, but the
final settlement agreement typically does not delineate how much of the settled
amount is due to this and other factors.
the
evaluation of data is also subject to distortion from extreme events or
structural shifts, sometimes in unanticipated ways. for example, the timing of
claims payments in one geographic region will be impacted if claim adjusters
are temporarily reassigned from that region to help settle catastrophe claims
in another region.
while
some changes in the claim environment are sudden in nature (such as a new court
ruling affecting the interpretation of all contracts in that jurisdiction),
others are more evolutionary. evolutionary changes can occur when multiple
factors affect final claim values, with the uncertainty surrounding each factor
being resolved separately, in step-wise fashion. the final impact is not known
until all steps have occurred.
sudden
changes generally cause a one-time shift in claim liability estimates, although
there may be some lag in reliable quantification of their impact. evolutionary
changes generally cause a series of shifts in claim liability estimates, as
each component of the evolutionary change becomes evident and estimable.
managements estimates
at
least once per quarter, company management meets with its actuaries to review
the latest claim and claim adjustment expense reserve analyses. based on these
analyses, management determines whether its ultimate claim liability estimates
should be changed. in doing so, it must evaluate whether the new data provided
represents credible actionable information or an anomaly that will have no
effect on estimated ultimate claim liability. for example, as described above,
payments may have decreased in one geographic region due to fewer claim
adjusters being available to process claims. the resulting claim payment
patterns would be analyzed to determine whether or not the change in payment
pattern represents a change in ultimate claim liability.
such
an assessment requires considerable judgment. it is frequently not possible to
determine whether a change in the data is an anomaly until sometime after the
event. even if a change is determined to be permanent, it is not always
possible to reliably determine the extent of the change until sometime later.
the overall detailed analyses supporting such an effort can take several months
to perform. this is due to the need to evaluate the underlying cause of the
trends observed, and may include the gathering or assembling of data not
previously available. it may also include interviews with experts involved with
the underlying processes. as a result, there can be a time lag between the
emergence of a change and a determination that the change should be reflected
in the companys estimated claim liabilities. the final estimate selected by
management in a reporting period is a function of these detailed analyses of
past data, adjusted to reflect any new actionable information.
discussion of product lines
the
following sectiondetails reserving considerations and common risk factors
by product line. there are many additional risk factors that may impact
ultimate claim costs. each risk factor presented will have a different impact
on required reserves. also, risk factors can have offsetting or compounding
effects on required reserves. for example, in workers compensation, the use of
expensive medical procedures that result in medical cost inflation may enable
workers to return to work faster, thereby lowering indemnity costs. thus, in
almost all cases, it is impossible to discretely measure the effect of a single
risk factor and construct a meaningful sensitivity expectation.
general liability
general
liability is generally considered a long tail line, as it takes a relatively
long period of time to finalize and settle claims from a given accident year.
the speed of claim reporting and claim settlement is a function of the specific
coverage provided, the jurisdiction and specific policy provisions such as
self-insured retentions. there are numerous components underlying the general
liability product line. some of these have relatively moderate payment patterns
(with most of the claims for a given accident year closed within 5 to 7 years),
while others can have extreme lags in both reporting and payment of claims
(e.g., a reporting lag of a decade for construction defect claims).
while the majority of general
liability coverages are written on an occurrence basis, certain general
liability coverages (such as those covering directors and officers or
professional liability) are typically insured on a claims-made basis.
general liability reserves are
generally analyzed as two components: primary and excess/umbrella, with the
primary component generally analyzed separately for bodily injury and property
damage. bodily injury liability payments reimburse the claimant for damages
pertaining to physical injury as a result of the policyholders legal
obligation arising from non-intentional acts such as negligence, subject to the
insurance policy provisions. in some cases the damages can include future wage
loss (which is a function of future earnings power and wage inflation) and
future medical treatment costs. property damage liability payments result from
damages to the claimants private property arising from the policyholders
legal obligation for non-intentional acts. in most cases, property damage
losses are a function of costs as of the loss date, or soon thereafter. in
addition, sizable or unique exposures are reviewed separately, such as
asbestos, environmental, other mass torts, construction defect, medical malpractice
and large unique accounts that would otherwise distort the analysis. these
unique categories often require a very high degree of judgment and require
reserve analyses that do not rely on traditional actuarial methods.
defense costs are also a part
of the insured costs covered by liability policies and can be significant,
sometimes greater than the cost of the actual paid claims. for some products
this risk is mitigated by policy language such that the insured portion of
defense costs erodes the amount of policy limit available to pay the claim.
such defense within the limits policies are most common for claims made
products. when defense costs are outside of the limits, amounts paid do not
erode the policy limits.
this line is typically the largest
source of reserve estimate uncertainty in the united states (excluding assumed
reinsurance contracts covering the same risk). major contributors to this
reserve estimate uncertainty include the reporting lag (i.e., the length of
time between the event triggering coverage and the actual reporting of the
claim), the number of parties involved in the underlying tort action, whether
the event triggering coverage is confined to only one time period or is
spread over multiple time periods, the potential dollars involved (in the
individual claim actions), whether such claims were reasonably foreseeable and
intended to be covered at the time the contracts were written (i.e., coverage
dispute potential), and the potential for mass claim actions. claims with longer
reporting lags result in greater inherent risk. this is especially true for
alleged claims with a latency feature, particularly where courts have ruled
that coverage is spread over multiple policy years, hence involving multiple
defendants (and their insurers and reinsurers) and multiple policies (thereby
increasing the potential dollars involved and the underlying settlement
complexity). claims with long latencies also increase the potential recognition
lag, i.e., the lag between writing a type of policy in a certain market and the
recognition that such policies have potential mass tort and/or latent claim
exposure.
the amount of reserve estimate
uncertainty also varies significantly by component for the general liability
product line. the components in this product line with the longest latency,
longest reporting lags, largest potential dollars involved, and greatest claim
settlement complexity are asbestos and environmental. components that include
latency, reporting lag and/or complexity issues, but to a materially lesser
extent than asbestos and environmental, include construction defect, medical
malpractice, and other mass tort actions. many components of general liability
are not subject to material latency or claim complexity risks and hence have
materially less uncertainty than the previously mentioned components. in
general, policies providing coverage with shorter reporting lags, fewer parties
involved in settlement negotiations, only one policy potentially triggered per
claim, fewer potential settlement dollars, reasonably foreseeable (and stable)
potential hazards/claims and no mass tort potential result in much less reserve
estimate uncertainty than policies without those characteristics.
examples of common risk factors
that can change and, thus, affect the required general liability reserves
(beyond those included in the general discussion section) include:
general liability risk factors
changes in claim handling philosophies
changes in policy provisions or court interpretation of such provision
new theories of liability
trends in jury awards
changes in the propensity to sue, in general with specificity to
particular issues
changes in statutes of limitations
changes in the underlying court system
distortions from losses resulting from large single accounts or single
issues
changes in tort law
shifts in law suit mix between federal and state courts
changes in claim adjuster office structure (causing distortions in the
data)
changes in settlement patterns (e.g., medical malpractice)
general liability book of business risk
factors
changes in policy provisions (e.g., deductibles, policy limits,
endorsements)
changes in underwriting standards
product mix (e.g., size of account, industries insured, jurisdiction
mix)
property
property is generally considered a short tail line with a simpler and
faster claim reporting and adjustment process than liability coverages, and
less uncertainty in the reserve setting process (except for more complex business
interruption claims). it is generally viewed as a moderate frequency, low to
moderate severity line, except for catastrophes and coverage related to large
properties. the claim reporting and settlement process for property coverage
claim reserves is generally restricted to the insured and the insurer. overall,
the claim liabilities for this line create a low estimation risk, except
possibly for catastrophes and business interruption claims.
property reserves are typically analyzed in two components, one for
catastrophic or other large single events, and another for all other events.
examples of common risk factors that can change and, thus, affect the required
property reserves (beyond those included in the general discussion section)
include:
property risk factors
physical concentration of policyholders
availability and cost of local contractors
for the more severe catastrophic events, demand surge inflation,
whereby the greatly increased demand for building materials such as plywood far
surpasses the immediate supply, leading to short-term material increases in
building material costs
local building codes
amount of time to return property to full usage (for business
interruption claims)
court interpretation of policy provisions (such as occurrence
definition)
lags in reporting claims (e.g., winter damage to summer homes, hidden
damage after an earthquake)
court or legislative changes to the statute of limitations
property book of business risk factors
policy provisions mix (e.g., deductibles, policy limits, endorsements)
changes in underwriting standards
commercial multi-peril
commercial multi-peril provides
a combination of property and liability coverage typically for small businesses
and, therefore, includes both short and long tail coverages. for property
coverage, it generally takes a relatively short period of time to close claims,
while for the other coverages, generally for the liability coverages, it takes
a longer period of time to close claims.
the
reserving risk for this line is dominated by the liability coverage portion of
this product, except occasionally in the event of catastrophic or large single
losses. the reserving risk for this line differs from that of the general
liability product line and the property product line due to the nature of the
customer. commercial multi-peril is generally sold to smaller sized accounts,
while the customer profile for general liability and property include larger
customers.
see
the discussions under the property and general liability product lines with
regard to reserving risk for commercial multi-peril.
commercial automobile
the
commercial automobile product line is a mix of property and liability coverages
and, therefore, includes both short and long tail coverages. the payments that
are made quickly typically pertain to auto physical damage (property) claims
and property damage (liability) claims. the payments that take longer to
finalize and are more difficult to estimate relate to bodily injury claims. in
general, claim reporting lags are minor, claim complexity is not a major issue,
and the line is viewed as high frequency, low to moderate severity. overall,
the claim liabilities for this line create a moderate estimation risk.
commercial
automobile reserves are typically analyzed in four components; bodily injury
liability, property damage liability, collision claims and comprehensive
claims. these last two components have minimum reserve risk and fast payouts
and, accordingly, separate risk factors are not presented.
examples
of common risk factors that can change and, thus, affect the required
commercial automobile reserves (beyond those included in the general discussion
section) include:
bodily injury and property damage liability risk factors
trends
in jury awards
changes
in the underlying court system
changes
in case law
litigation
trends
frequency
of claims with payment capped by policy limits
change
in average severity of accidents, or proportion of severe accidents
subrogation
opportunities
changes
in claim handling philosophies
frequency
of visits to health providers
number
of medical procedures given during visits to health providers
types
of health providers used
types
of medical treatments received
changes
in cost of medical treatments
degree
of patient responsiveness to treatment
commercial automobile book of business risk factors
changes
in policy provisions (e.g., deductibles, policy limits, endorsements, etc.)
changes
in mix of insured vehicles (e.g., long haul trucks versus local and smaller
vehicles, fleet risks versus non-fleets)
changes
in underwriting standards
workers compensation
workers
compensation is generally considered a long tail coverage, as it takes a
relatively long period of time to finalize claims from a given accident year.
while certain payments such as initial medical treatment or temporary wage
replacement for the injured worker are made quickly, some other payments are
made over the course of several years, such as awards for permanent partial
injuries. in addition, some payments can run as long as the injured workers
life, such as permanent disability benefits and on-going medical care. despite
the possibility of long payment tails, the reporting lags are generally short,
settlements are generally not complex, and most of the liability can be
considered high frequency with moderate severity. the largest reserve risk
generally comes from the low frequency, high severity claims providing lifetime
coverage for medical expense arising from a workers injury. overall, the claim
liabilities for this line create a somewhat greater than moderate estimation
risk.
workers
compensation reserves are typically analyzed in three components: indemnity
losses, medical losses and claim adjustment expenses.
examples
of common risk factors that can change and, thus, affect the required workers
compensation reserves (beyond those included in the general discussion section)
include:
indemnity risk factors
time
required to recover from the injury
degree
of available transitional jobs
degree
of legal involvement
changes
in the interpretations and processes of the workers compensation commissions
oversight of claims(1)
future
wage inflation for states that index benefits
changes
in the administrative policies of second injury funds
medical risk factors
changes
in the cost of medical treatments (including prescription drugs) and underlying
fee schedules (inflation)
frequency
of visits to health providers
number
of medical procedures given during visits to health providers
types
of health providers used
type
of medical treatments received
use
of preferred provider networks and other medical cost containment practices
availability
of new medical processes and equipment
changes
in the use of pharmaceutical drugs
degree
of patient responsiveness to treatment
(1) these are administrative bodies that evaluate
whether or not a given claim for workers compensation benefits is valid.
duties include the determination of whether a given injury arose out of the
scope of employment, or the determination of the degree of injury where
disputes exist.
general workers compensation risk factors
frequency
of claim reopenings on claims previously closed
mortality
trends of injured workers with lifetime benefits and medical treatment
degree
of cost shifting between workers compensation and health insurance
workers compensation book of business risk factors
product
mix
injury
type mix
changes
in underwriting standards
fidelity and surety
fidelity
is generally considered a short tail coverage. it takes a relatively short
period of time to finalize and settle fidelity claims. the volatility of
fidelity reserves is generally related to the type of business of the insured,
the size and complexity of the insureds business operations, amount of policy
limit and attachment point of coverage. the uncertainty surrounding reserves
for small, commercial insureds is typically less than the uncertainty for large
commercial or financial institutions. the high frequency, low severity nature
of small commercial fidelity losses provides for stability in loss estimates
whereas, the low frequency, high severity nature of losses for large insureds
results in a wider range of ultimate loss outcomes. actuarial techniques that
rely on a stable pattern of loss development are generally not applicable to
low frequency, high severity policies.
surety
has certain components that are generally considered short tail coverages with
short reporting lags, although large individual construction and commercial
surety contracts can result in a somewhat longer settlement tail, based on the
length and complexity of the construction project or commercial transaction
being insured. (large construction projects can take many years to complete.)
the frequency of losses in surety correlates with economic cycles as the
primary cause of surety loss is the inability to perform financially. the
volatility of surety losses is generally related to the type of business
performed by the insured, the type of bonded obligation, the amount of limit
exposed to loss and the amount of assets available to the insurer to mitigate
losses, such as unbilled contract funds, collateral, first and third party
indemnity, and other security positions of an insureds assets. certain classes
of surety claims are very high severity, low frequency in nature. these can
include large construction contractors involved with one or multiple large,
complex projects as well as certain large commercial surety exposures. other
claim factors affecting reserve variability of surety include litigation
related to amounts owed by and due the insured (e.g., salvage and subrogation
efforts) and the results of financial restructuring of an insured.
examples
of common risk factors that can change and, thus, affect the required fidelity
and surety reserves (beyond those included in the general discussion section)
include:
fidelity risk factors
type
of business of insured
policy
limit and attachment points
third-party
claims
coverage
litigation
complexity
of claims
growth
in insureds operations
surety risk factors
economic
trends, including the general level of construction activity
concentration
of reserves in a relatively few large claims
type
of business insured
type
of obligation insured
cumulative
limits of liability for insured
assets
available to mitigate loss
defective
workmanship/latent defects
financial
strategy of insured
changes
in statutory obligations
geographic
spread of business
fidelity and surety book of business risk factors
changes in policy provisions (e.g., deductibles,
limits, endorsements)
changes in underwriting standards
personal automobile
personal
automobile includes both short and long tail coverages. the payments that are
made quickly typically pertain to auto physical damage (property) claims and
property damage (liability) claims. the payments that take longer to finalize
and are more difficult to estimate relate to bodily injury claims. reporting
lags are relatively short and the claim settlement process for personal
automobile liability generally is the least complex of the liability products.
it is generally viewed as a high frequency, low to moderate severity product
line. overall, the claim liabilities for this line create a moderate estimation
risk.
personal
automobile reserves are typically analyzed in five components: bodily injury
liability, property damage liability, no-fault losses, collision claims and
comprehensive claims. these last two components have minimum reserve risk and
fast payouts and, accordingly, separate factors are not presented.
examples
of common risk factors that can change and, thus, affect the required personal
automobile reserves (beyond those included in the general discussion section)
include:
bodily injury and property damage liability risk factors
trends
in jury awards
changes
in the underlying court system and its philosophy
changes
in case law
litigation
trends
frequency
of claims with payment capped by policy limits
change
in average severity of accidents, or proportion of severe accidents
subrogation
opportunities
degree
of patient responsiveness to treatment
changes
in claim handling philosophies
no-fault risk factors (for selected states and time periods)
effectiveness
of no-fault laws
frequency
of visits to health providers
number
of medical procedures given during visits to health providers
types
of health providers used
types
of medical treatments received
changes
in cost of medical treatments
degree
of patient responsiveness to treatment
personal automobile book of business risk factors
changes
in policy provisions (e.g., deductibles, policy limits, endorsements, etc.)
changes
in underwriting standards
homeowners and personal lines other
homeowners
is generally considered a short tail coverage. most payments are related to the
property portion of the policy, where the claim reporting and settlement
process is generally restricted to the insured and the insurer. claims on
property coverage are typically reported soon after the actual damage occurs,
although delays of several months are not unusual. the claim is settled when
the two parties agree on the amount due in accordance with the policy contract
language and the appropriate payment is made (or alternatively, the property
replacement/repair is performed by the insurer). the resulting settlement
process is typically fairly short term, although exceptions do exist.
the
liability portion of the homeowners policy generates claims which take longer
to pay due to the involvement of litigation and negotiation, but with generally
small reporting lags. in addition, reserves related to umbrella coverages have
greater uncertainty since umbrella liability payments are often made far into
the future.
overall,
the line is generally high frequency, low to moderate severity (except for
catastrophes), with simple to moderate claim complexity.
homeowners
reserves are typically analyzed in two components: non-catastrophe related
losses and catastrophe loss payments.
examples
of common risk factors that can change and, thus, affect the required
homeowners reserves (beyond those included in the general reserve discussion
section) include:
non-catastrophe risk factors
salvage
opportunities
amount
of time to return property to residential use
changes
in weather patterns
local
building codes
litigation
trends
trends
in jury awards
catastrophe risk factors
physical
concentration of policyholders
availability
and cost of local contractors
local
building codes
quality
of construction of damaged homes
amount
of time to return property to residential use
for
the more severe catastrophic events, demand surge inflation, whereby the
greatly increased demand for building materials such as plywood far surpasses
the immediate supply, leading to short-term material increases in building
material costs
homeowners book of business risk factors
policy
provisions mix (e.g., deductibles, policy limits, endorsements, etc.)
degree
of concentration of policyholders
changes
in underwriting standards
international and other
international
and other includes the international product line and other products not
discussed above. the principle component of other is assumed reinsurance
written on an excess-of-loss basis, which may include reinsurance of non-u.s.
exposures, and is primarily runoff business.
international
and other claim liabilities result from a mix of coverages, currencies and
jurisdictions/countries. the common characteristic is the need to customize the
analysis to the individual component, and the inability to rely on data
characterizations and reporting requirements in the u.s. statutory reporting
framework.
due
to changes in the business mix for this line over time, the recently incurred
claim liabilities are relatively short term (due to both the products and the
jurisdictions involved, e.g., the republic of ireland and the united kingdom),
while the older liabilities include some from runoff operations that are
extremely long tail (e.g., u.s. excess liabilities reinsured through the london
market, and several underwriting pools in runoff). the speed of claim reporting
and claim settlement is a function of the specific coverage provided, the
jurisdiction, the distribution system (e.g., underwriting pool versus direct),
and the proximity of the insurance sale to the insured hazard (e.g., insured
and insurer located in different countries). in particular, liabilities arising
from the underwriting pools in runoff may result in significant reporting lags,
settlement lags and claim complexity, due to the need to coordinate with other
pool members or co-insurers through a broker or lead-insurer for claim
settlement purposes.
international
and other reserves are generally analyzed by program/pool, country and general
coverage category (e.g., u.s. liabilityexcess of loss reinsurance, or general
liability  municipalities  by country.) the business is also generally split
by direct versus assumed reinsurance for a given coverage/jurisdiction. where
the underlying insured hazard is outside the united states, the underlying
coverages are generally similar to those described under the general liability
and automobile discussion above, but under a different legal system. where the
underlying hazard is within the u.s., the coverage involved is typically that
of general liability, but on an excess or excess-of-loss reinsurance basis.
excess exposure requires the insured to prove not only claims under the
policy, but also the prior payment of claims reaching up to the excess policys
attachment point.
examples
of common risk factors that can change and, thus, affect the required
international and other reserves (beyond those included in the general
discussion section) include:
international and other risk factors
changes
in claim handling procedures, including those of the primary carriers
changes
in policy provisions or court interpretation of such provision
new
theories of liability
trends
in jury awards
changes
in the propensity to sue
changes
in statutes of limitations
changes
in the underlying court system
distortions
from losses resulting from large single accounts or single issues
changes
in tort law
changes
in claim adjuster office structure (causing distortions in the data)
international and other book of business risk factors
changes
in policy provisions (e.g., deductibles, policy limits, endorsements, claims
made language)
changes
in underwriting standards
product
mix (e.g., size of account, industries insured, jurisdiction mix)
reinsurance recoverables
the following table
summarizes the composition of the companys reinsurance recoverable assets:
(at december 31, in millions)
gross
reinsurance recoverables on paid and unpaid claims and claim adjustment
expenses
$
14,177
$
13,367
allowance for
uncollectible reinsurance
(804
)
(751
)
net
reinsurance recoverables
13,373
12,616
mandatory pools
and associations
2,211
2,497
structured
settlements
3,990
3,941
total
reinsurance recoverables
$
19,574
$
19,054
the
$810 million increase in gross reinsurance recoverables over year-end 2004 was
primarily due to recoverables resulting from hurricanes katrina, rita and wilma.
amounts recoverable from reinsurers are estimated in a manner consistent with
the associated claim liability. the company evaluates and monitors the
financial condition of its reinsurers under voluntary reinsurance arrangements
to minimize its exposure to significant losses from reinsurer insolvencies. in
addition, in the ordinary course of business, the company becomes involved in
coverage disputes with its reinsurers. some of these disputes could result in lawsuits
and arbitrations brought by or against the reinsurers to determine the companys
rights and obligations under the various reinsurance agreements. the company
employs dedicated specialists and aggressive strategies to manage reinsurance
collections and disputes.
the
company reports its reinsurance recoverables net of an allowance for estimated
uncollectible reinsurance recoverables. the allowance is based upon the companys
ongoing review of amounts outstanding, length of collection periods, changes in
reinsurer credit standing, disputes, applicable coverage defenses, and other
relevant factors. accordingly, the establishment of reinsurance recoverables
and the related allowance for uncollectible reinsurance recoverables is also an
inherently uncertain process involving estimates. changes in these estimates
could result in additional income statement charges. the increase in the
allowance for uncollectible reinsurance in 2005 was $53 million.
investment impairments
fixed maturities and equity securities
an
investment in a fixed maturity or equity security which is available for sale
or reported at fair value is impaired if its fair value falls below its book
value and the decline is considered to be other-than-temporary.
fixed
maturities for which fair value is less than 80% of amortized cost for more
than one quarter are evaluated for other-than-temporary impairment. a fixed
maturity is impaired if it is probable that the company will not be able to
collect all amounts due under the securitys contractual terms.
factors
the company considers in determining whether a decline is other-than-temporary
for debt securities include the following:
the length of time and the extent to which
fair value has been below cost. it is likely that the company will conclude
that the decline is other-than-temporary if the market value has been below
cost for six to nine months;
the financial condition and near-term
prospects of the issuer. the issuer may be experiencing depressed and declining
earnings relative to competitors, erosion of market share, deteriorating
financial position, lowered dividend payments, declines in securities ratings,
bankruptcy, and financial statement reports that indicate an uncertain future.
also, the issuer may experience specific events that may influence its
operations or earnings potential, such as changes in technology,
discontinuation of a business segment, catastrophic losses or exhaustion of
natural resources; and
the companys ability and intent to hold the
investment for a period of time sufficient to allow for any anticipated
recovery.
equity
investments are impaired when it becomes probable that the company will not
recover its cost over the expected holding period. public equity investments
(i.e., common stocks) trading at a price that is less than 80% of cost for more
than one quarter are reviewed for impairment. investments accounted for using
the equity method of accounting are evaluated for impairment any time the
investment has sustained losses and/or negative operating cash flow for a
period of nine months or more. events triggering the other-than-temporary
impairment analysis of public and non-public equities may include the
following, in addition to the considerations noted above for debt securities:
factors
affecting performance:
the investee loses a principal customer or
supplier for which there is no short-term prospect for replacement or
experiences other substantial changes in market conditions;
the company is performing substantially and
consistently behind plan;
the investee has announced, or the company
has become aware of, adverse changes or events such as changes or planned
changes in senior management, restructurings, or a sale of assets; and
the regulatory, economic, or technological
environment has changed in a way that is expected to adversely affect the
investees profitability.
factors
affecting on-going financial condition:
factors that raise doubts about the investees
ability to continue as a going concern, such as negative cash flows from
operations, working-capital deficiencies, investment advisors recommendations,
or non-compliance with regulatory capital requirements or debt covenants;
a secondary equity offering at a price
substantially lower than the holders cost;
a breach of a covenant or the failure to
service debt; and
fraud within the company.
for
fixed maturity and equity investments, factors that may indicate that a decline
in value is not other-than-temporary include the following:
the securities owned continue to generate
reasonable earnings and dividends, despite a general stock market decline;
bond interest or preferred stock dividend
rate (on cost) is lower than rates for similar securities issued currently but
quality of investment is not adversely affected;
the investment is performing as expected and
is current on all expected payments;
specific, recognizable, short-term factors
have affected the market value; and
financial condition, market share, backlog
and other key statistics indicate growth.
real estate investments
the
carrying values of real estate properties are reviewed for impairment when
events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be
recoverable. the review for impairment includes an estimate of the undiscounted
cash flows expected to result from the use and eventual disposition of the real
estate property. an impairment loss is recognized if the expected future
undiscounted cash flows are less than the carrying value of the real estate
property.
venture capital investments
other
investments include venture capital investments, which are generally
non-publicly traded instruments, consisting of early-stage companies and,
historically, having a holding period of four to seven years. these investments
have primarily been made in the health care, software and computer services,
and networking and information technologies infrastructures industries. the
company typically is involved with venture capital companies early in their
formation, as they are developing and determining the viability of, and market
demand for, their product. generally the company does not expect these venture
capital companies to record revenues in the early stages of their development,
which can often take three to four years, and does not generally expect them to
become profitable for an even longer period of time. with respect to the
companys valuation of such non-publicly traded venture capital investments, on
a quarterly basis, portfolio managers as well as an internal valuation
committee review and consider a variety of factors in determining the potential
for loss impairment. factors considered include the following:
the issuers most recent financing event;
an analysis of whether fundamental
deterioration has occurred;
whether or not the issuers progress has been
substantially less than expected;
whether or not the valuations have declined
significantly in the entitys market sector;
whether or not the internal valuation
committee believes it is probable that the issuer will need financing within
six months at a lower price than our carrying value; and
whether or not we have the ability and intent
to hold the security for a period of time sufficient to allow for recovery,
enabling us to receive value equal to or greater than our cost.
the
quarterly valuation procedures described above are in addition to the portfolio
managers ongoing responsibility to frequently monitor developments affecting
those invested assets, paying particular attention to events that might give
rise to impairment write-downs.
the
company manages the portfolio to maximize long-term return, evaluating current
market conditions and the future outlook for the entities in which it has
invested. because this portfolio primarily consists of privately-held,
early-stage venture investments, events giving rise to impairment can occur in
a brief period of time (e.g., the entity has been unsuccessful in securing
additional financing, other investors decide to withdraw their support,
complications arise in the product development process, etc.), and decisions
are made at that point in time, based on the specific facts and circumstances, with
respect to a recognition of other-than-temporary impairment or sale of the
investment.
non-publicly traded investments
the
companys investment portfolio includes non-publicly traded investments, such
as venture capital investments, private equity limited partnerships, joint
ventures, other limited partnerships, and certain fixed income securities. certain
venture capital investments that are controlled by the company are consolidated
in the companys financial statements. the company uses the equity method of
accounting for joint ventures, limited partnerships and certain private equity
securities. certain other private equity investments, including venture capital
investments, are not subject to the provisions of statement of financial
accounting standards (fas) no. 115, accounting
for certain investments in debt and equity securities, but are
reported at estimated fair value in accordance with fas 60, accounting and reporting by insurance enterprises.
the fair value of the venture capital investments is based on an estimate
determined by an internal valuation committee for securities for which there is
no public market. the internal valuation committee reviews such factors as
recent filings, operating results, balance sheet stability, growth, and other
business and market sector fundamental statistics in estimating fair values of
specific investments. other non-publicly traded securities are valued based on
factors such as management judgment, recent financial information and other
market data. an impairment loss is recognized if, based on the specific facts
and circumstances, it is probable that the company will not be able to recover
all of the cost of an individual holding.
the
following is a summary of the approximate carrying value of the companys
non-publicly traded securities at december 31, 2005:
(in millions)
carryingvalue
investment partnerships, including hedge funds
$
1,802
fixed income securities
equity investments
real estate partnerships and joint ventures
venture capital
total
$
2,754
other uncertainties
for
a discussion of other risks and uncertainties that could impact the companys
results of operations or financial condition, see note 17 of notes to the
companys consolidated financial statements and item 1a  risk factors.
future application of accounting standards
see
note 1 of notes to the companys consolidated financial statements for a
discussion of recently issued accounting pronouncements.
forward-looking statements
this
report may contain, and management may make, certain forward-looking
statements within the meaning of the private securities litigation reform act
of 1995. all statements, other than statements of historical facts, may
be forward-looking statements. specifically, the company may make
forward-looking statements about the companys results of operations
(including, among others, premium volume, income from continuing operations,
net and operating income and return on equity), financial condition and
liquidity; the sufficiency of the companys asbestos and other reserves
(including, among others, asbestos claim payment patterns); the post-merger
integration (including, among others, expense savings); the cost and
availability of reinsurance coverage; and strategic initiatives. such
statements are subject to risks and uncertainties, many of which are difficult
to predict and generally beyond the companys control, that could cause actual
results to differ materially from those expressed in, or implied or projected
by, the forward-looking information and statements.
for
a discussion of some of the factors that could cause actual results to differ,
see item 1a - risk factors.
the
companys forward-looking statements speak only as of the date of this report
or as of the date they are made, and the company undertakes no obligation to
update its forward-looking statements.
item 7a. quantitative and qualitative disclosures about
market risk
market risk
market
risk is the risk of loss arising from adverse changes in market rates and
prices, such as interest rates, foreign currency exchange rates, and other
relevant market rate or price changes. market risk is directly influenced by
the volatility and liquidity in the markets in which the related underlying
assets are traded. the following is a discussion of the companys primary
market risk exposures and how those exposures are managed as of december 31,
2005. the companys market risk sensitive instruments, including derivatives,
are primarily entered into for purposes other than trading.
the
carrying value of the companys investment portfolio as of december 31, 2005
and 2004 was $68.29 billion and $64.37 billion, respectively, of which 86% and
84% was invested in fixed maturity securities, respectively. at december 31,
2005 and 2004, approximately 6% and 7%, respectively, of the companys invested
assets were denominated in foreign currencies. the companys exposure to equity
price risk is not significant. the company has no direct commodity risk.
the
primary market risk to the investment portfolio is interest rate risk
associated with investments in fixed maturity securities. the portfolio
duration relative to the liabilities duration is primarily managed through
cash market transactions and treasury futures transactions.
the
primary market risk for all of the companys debt is interest rate risk at the
time of refinancing. the company monitors the interest rate environment and
evaluates refinancing opportunities as maturity dates approach. for additional
information regarding the companys debt see note 10 to the companys
consolidated financial statements as well as the liquidity and capital
resources section of managements discussion and analysis.
the
companys foreign exchange market risk exposure is concentrated in the companys
invested assets and insurance reserves denominated in foreign currencies. cash
flows from the companys foreign operations are the primary source of funds for
the purchase of investments denominated in foreign currencies. the company
purchases these investments primarily to fund insurance reserves and other
liabilities denominated in the same currency, effectively reducing its foreign
currency exchange rate exposure. invested assets denominated in the british
pound sterling comprised approximately 2.4% and 3.5% of the total invested
assets at december 31, 2005 and 2004, respectively. no other individual foreign
currency accounted for more than 1.8% of the companys invested assets at
december 31, 2005 or 2004.
there
were no other significant changes in the companys primary market risk
exposures or in how those exposures were managed for the year ended december
31, 2005 compared to the year ended december 31, 2004. the company does not
currently anticipate significant changes in its primary market risk exposures
or in how those exposures are managed in future reporting periods based upon
what is known or expected to be in effect in future reporting periods.
sensitivity analysis
sensitivity
analysis is defined as the measurement of potential loss in future earnings,
fair values or cash flows of market sensitive instruments resulting from one or
more selected hypothetical changes in interest rates and other market rates or
prices over a selected time. in the companys sensitivity analysis model, a
hypothetical change in market rates is selected that is expected to reflect
reasonably possible near-term changes in those rates. near-term means a
period of time going forward up to one year from the date of the consolidated
financial statements. actual results may differ from the hypothetical change in
market rates assumed in this disclosure, especially since this sensitivity
analysis does not reflect the results of any actions that would be taken by the
company to mitigate such hypothetical losses in fair value.
interest rate risk
in
this sensitivity analysis model, the company uses fair values to measure its
potential loss. the sensitivity analysis model includes the following financial
instruments entered into for purposes other than trading: fixed maturities,
non-redeemable preferred stocks, mortgage loans, short-term securities, debt
and derivative financial instruments. the primary market risk to the companys
market sensitive instruments is interest rate risk. the sensitivity analysis
model uses a 100 basis point change in interest rates to measure the
hypothetical change in fair value of financial instruments included in the model.
for
invested assets with primary exposure to interest rate risk, estimates of
portfolio duration and convexity are used to model the loss of fair value that
would be expected to result from a parallel increase in interest rates.
durations on invested assets are adjusted for call, put and interest rate reset
features. durations on tax-exempt securities are adjusted for the fact that the
yields on such securities do not normally move in lockstep with changes in the
u.s. treasury curve. fixed maturity portfolio durations are calculated on a
market value weighted basis, including accrued interest, using holdings as of
december 31, 2005 and 2004.
for
debt, the change in fair value is determined by calculating hypothetical
december 31, 2005 and 2004 ending prices based on yields adjusted to reflect a
100 basis point change, comparing such hypothetical ending prices to actual
ending prices, and multiplying the difference by the par or securities
outstanding.
the
sensitivity analysis model used by the company produces a loss in fair value of
market sensitive instruments of approximately $2.2 billion and $2.1 billion
based on a 100 basis point increase in interest rates as of december 31, 2005
and 2004, respectively.
the
loss estimates do not take into account the impact of possible interventions
that the company might reasonably undertake in order to mitigate or avoid
losses that would result from emerging interest rate trends. in addition, the
loss value only reflects the impact of an interest rate increase on the fair
value of the companys financial instruments. as a result, the loss value
excludes a significant portion of the companys consolidated balance sheet,
which if included in the sensitivity analysis model, would mitigate the impact
of the loss in fair value associated with a 100 basis point increase in
interest rates.
foreign currency exchange rate risk
the
company uses fair values of investment securities to measure its potential loss
from foreign denominated investments. a hypothetical 10% reduction in value of
foreign denominated investments is used to estimate the impact on the market
value of the foreign denominated holdings. the potential loss is reduced by
foreign currency forward transactions that are used to hedge a portion of the
companys exposure to foreign currencies. the companys analysis indicates that
a hypothetical 10% reduction in the value of foreign denominated investments
would be expected to produce a loss in fair value of approximately $374 million
and $438 million at december 31, 2005 and 2004, respectively.
item8. financial
statements and supplementary data
index to consolidated financial statements
page
report of independent
registered public accounting firm
consolidated statement of income
for the years ended december 31, 2005, 2004 and 2003
consolidated balance sheet at
december 31, 2005 and 2004
consolidated statement of
changes in shareholders equity for the years ended december 31, 2005, 2004
and 2003
consolidated statement of
cash flows for the years ended december 31, 2005, 2004 and 2003
notes to consolidated
financial statements
report of independent registered public accounting
firm
the board of directors and
stockholders
the st. paul travelers
companies, inc.:
we
have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheet of the st. paul
travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries as of december 31, 2005 and 2004,
and the related consolidated statements of income, changes in shareholders
equity, and cash flows for each of the years in the three-year period ended
december 31, 2005. these consolidated financial statements are the
responsibility of the companys management. our responsibility is to express an
opinion on these consolidated financial statements based on our audits.
we
conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the public company
accounting oversight board (united states). those standards require that we
plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the
financial statements are free of material misstatement. an audit includes
examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in
the financial statements. an audit also includes assessing the accounting
principles used and significant estimates made by management, as well as
evaluating the overall financial statement presentation. we believe that our
audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
in
our opinion, the consolidated financial statements referred to above present
fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of the st. paul
travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries as of december 31, 2005 and 2004,
and the results of their operations and their cash flows for each of the years
in the three-year period ended december 31, 2005, in conformity with u.s.
generally accepted accounting principles.
we
also have audited, in accordance with the standards of the public company
accounting oversight board (united states), the effectiveness of the st. paul
travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries internal control over financial
reporting as of december 31, 2005, based on criteria established in internal
control  integrated framework issued by the committee of sponsoring
organizations of the treadway commission (coso), and our report dated february
27, 2006 expressed an unqualified opinion on managements assessment of, and
the effective operation of, internal control over financial reporting.
/s/ kpmg llp
kpmg
llp
minneapolis, minnesota
february 27, 2006
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and
subsidiaries
consolidated statement of income
(in millions, except per share data)
for the year ended december 31,
revenues
premiums
$
20,341
$
19,038
$
12,545
net investment
income
3,165
2,663
1,869
fee income
net realized
investment gains (losses)
(39
)
other revenues
total
revenues
24,365
22,544
15,139
claims
and expenses
claims and claim
adjustment expenses
14,927
15,439
9,118
amortization of
deferred acquisition costs
3,252
2,978
1,984
general and
administrative expenses
3,229
2,945
1,641
interest expense
total
claims and expenses
21,694
21,598
12,910
income
from continuing operations before income taxes and minority interest
2,671
2,229
income tax
expense
minority
interest, net of tax
(4
)
income
from continuing operations
2,061
1,696
discontinued
operations:
operating income
(loss), net of taxes
(663
)
gain on
disposal, net of taxes
income (loss)
from discontinued operations
(439
)
net
income
$
1,622
$
$
1,696
basic
earnings per share
income from
continuing operations
$
3.04
$
1.42
$
3.91
income (loss)
from discontinued operations
(0.65
)
0.14
net
income
$
2.39
$
1.56
$
3.91
diluted
earnings per share
income from
continuing operations
$
2.95
$
1.40
$
3.80
income (loss)
from discontinued operations
(0.62
)
0.13
net
income
$
2.33
$
1.53
$
3.80
weighted
average number of common shares outstanding:
basic
676.3
608.3
434.3
diluted
712.8
628.3
453.3
see notes to consolidated financial statements.
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and
subsidiaries
consolidated balance sheet
(in millions)
at december 31,
assets
fixed maturities,
available for sale at fair value (including $2,667 and $2,603 subject to
securities lending and repurchase agreements) (amortized cost $58,616 and
$53,017)
$
58,983
$
54,269
equity
securities, at fair value (cost $538 and $687)
real estate
mortgage loans
short-term
securities
4,802
4,944
other
investments
3,026
3,432
total
investments
68,287
64,368
cash
investment
income accrued
premiums
receivable
6,124
6,201
reinsurance
recoverables
19,574
19,054
ceded unearned
premiums
1,322
1,565
deferred
acquisition costs
1,527
1,559
deferred tax
asset
2,062
2,198
contractholder
receivables
5,516
5,629
goodwill
3,442
3,564
intangible
assets
1,062
net assets of
discontinued operations
2,041
other assets
3,318
3,072
total
assets
$
113,187
$
111,246
liabilities
claims and claim
adjustment expense reserves
$
61,090
$
59,070
unearned premium
reserves
10,927
11,310
contractholder
payables
5,516
5,629
payables for
reinsurance premiums
debt
5,850
6,313
other
liabilities
6,781
6,827
total
liabilities
90,884
90,045
shareholders
equity
preferred stock:
savings
planconvertible preferred stock (0.5 shares and 0.6 shares issued and
outstanding)
guaranteed
obligationstock ownership plan
(5
)
common stock
(1,750.0 shares authorized; 694.6 and 670.7 shares issued;
693.4and670.3shares outstanding)
18,179
17,414
retained
earnings
3,750
2,744
accumulated
other changes in equity from nonowner sources
treasury stock,
at cost (1.2 and 0.4 shares)
(47
)
(14
)
unearned compensation
(83
)
(83
)
total
shareholders equity
22,303
21,201
total
liabilities and shareholders equity
$
113,187
$
111,246
see notes to consolidated financial statements.
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and
subsidiaries
consolidated statement of changes in shareholders
equity
(in millions)
for the year ended december 31,
convertible
preferred stocksavings plan
balance,
beginning of year
$
$
$
preferred stock
assumed at merger
redemptions
during year
(40
)
(26
)
balance, end of
year
guaranteed
obligationstock ownership plan
balance,
beginning of year
(5
)
obligations
assumed at merger
(15
)
principal
payments
balance, end of
year
(5
)
total preferred
shareholders equity
common
stock and additional paid-in capital
balance,
beginning of year
17,414
8,715
8,628
shares issued
pursuant to maturity of equity unit forward contracts
net shares
issued under employee stock-based compensation plans
shares issued
for merger
8,608
adjustment for
treasury stock cancelled and retired at merger
(91
)
other changes
(22
)
balance, end of
year
18,179
17,414
8,715
retained
earnings
balance,
beginning of year
2,744
2,290
net income
1,622
1,696
dividends
(628
)
(529
)
(286
)
minority
interest and other
balance, end of
year
3,750
2,744
2,290
accumulated
other changes in equity from nonowner sources, net of tax
balance,
beginning of year
1,086
change in net
unrealized gain (loss) on investment securities
(541
)
(192
)
change in
minimum pension liability adjustment
(8
)
net change in
unrealized foreign currency translation and other changes
(52
)
balance, end of
year
1,086
treasury
stock (at cost)
balance,
beginning of year
(14
)
(74
)
(5
)
net shares
issued under employee stock-based compensation plans
(33
)
(31
)
(29
)
treasury stock
cancelled and retired at merger
treasury stock
acquired
(40
)
balance, end of
year
(47
)
(14
)
(74
)
unearned
compensation
balance,
beginning of year
(83
)
(30
)
(23
)
net issuance of
restricted stock under employee stock-based compensation plans
(71
)
(64
)
(32
)
equity-based
award amortization
unvested
equity-based awards assumed in merger
(43
)
balance, end of
year
(83
)
(83
)
(30
)
total common
shareholders equity
22,150
21,013
11,987
total
shareholders equity
$
22,303
$
21,201
$
11,987
common
shares outstanding
balance,
beginning of year
670.3
435.8
435.1
common stock
issued pursuant to maturity of equity unit forward contracts
15.2
net shares
issued under employee stock-based compensation plans
7.9
5.2
1.8
common stock
assumed at merger
229.3
treasury stock
acquired
(1.1
)
balance, end of
year
693.4
670.3
435.8
summary
of changes in equity from nonowner sources
net income
$
1,622
$
$
1,696
other changes in
equity from nonowner sources, net of tax
(601
)
(134
)
total changes in
equity from nonowner sources
$
1,021
$
$
2,125
see notes to consolidated financial statements.
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and
subsidiaries
consolidated statement of cash flows
(in millions)
for the year ended december 31,
2005(1)
2004(1)
cash
flows from operating activities
net income
$
1,622
$
$
1,696
adjustments to
reconcile net income to net cash provided by operating activities:
loss (income)
from discontinued operations, net of tax
(88
)
net realized
investment (gains) losses
(17
)
(38
)
depreciation and
amortization
deferred federal
income tax (benefit) on continuing operations
(280
)
amortization of
deferred policy acquisition costs
3,252
2,978
1,984
premiums
receivable
(228
)
reinsurance
recoverables
(520
)
(197
)
deferred
acquisition costs
(3,220
)
(2,948
)
(2,076
)
claims and claim
adjustment expense reserves
2,032
3,473
unearned premium
reserves
(383
)
(42
)
trading account
activities
(16
)
recoveries from
former affiliate
other
(890
)
(467
)
net
cash provided by operating activities of continuing operations
3,589
5,066
3,834
net
cash provided by operating activities of discontinued operations
net
cash provided by operating activities
3,613
5,241
3,834
cash
flows from investing activities
proceeds from
maturities of investments:
fixed maturities
4,952
5,621
4,462
mortgage loans
proceeds from
sales of investments:
fixed maturities
5,192
7,945
8,343
equity
securities
mortgage loans
real estate
purchases of
investments:
fixed maturities
(16,046
)
(16,522
)
(15,555
)
equity
securities
(63
)
(94
)
(61
)
mortgage loans
(55
)
(12
)
real estate
(49
)
(22
)
short-term
securities, (purchases) sales, net
(1,913
)
2,910
other
investments, net
securities transactions
in course of settlement
(595
)
(1,108
)
(2,946
)
net proceeds
from the sale of discontinued operations
2,399
net cash
acquired in merger
other
(132
)
net
cash used in investing activities of continuing operations
(3,036
)
(4,647
)
(2,475
)
net
cash used in investing activities of discontinued operations
(20
)
(139
)
net
cash used in investing activities
(3,056
)
(4,786
)
(2,475
)
cash
flows from financing activities
issuance of debt
1,932
payment of debt
(815
)
(227
)
(1,103
)
issuance of
common stock  maturity of equity unit forward contracts
dividends to
shareholders
(628
)
(642
)
(282
)
issuance of
common stock-employee stock options
treasury stock
acquirednet employee stock-based compensation
(33
)
(23
)
(18
)
repurchase of
minority interest of subsidiary
(76
)
payment of
dividend on subsidiarys stock
(5
)
payment of note
payable to former affiliate
(700
)
redemption of
mandatorily redeemable securities of subsidiary trusts
(900
)
treasury stock
purchased
(40
)
transfer of
employee benefit obligations to former affiliates
(23
)
other
(3
)
net
cash used in financing activities of continuing operations
(473
)
(516
)
(1,099
)
net
cash used in financing activities of discontinued operations
(24
)
net
cash used in financing activities
(469
)
(540
)
(1,099
)
effect of
exchange rate changes on cash
(5
)
elimination of
cash provided by discontinued operations
(8
)
(12
)
net increase
(decrease) in cash
(90
)
cash at
beginning of period
cash at
end of period
$
$
$
supplemental
disclosure of cash flow information
income taxes
paid (refunded)
$
$
$
(64
)
interest paid
$
$
$
(1) see note 3.
see notes to consolidated financial statements.
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and
subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
1. summary of
significant accounting policies
basis of presentation
the consolidated financial
statements include the accounts of the st. paul travelers companies, inc.
(together with its subsidiaries, the company). on april 1, 2004, travelers
property casualty corp. (tpc) merged with a subsidiary of the st. paul
companies, inc. (spc), as a result of which tpc became a wholly-owned
subsidiary of the st. paul travelers companies, inc. for accounting purposes,
this transaction was accounted for as a reverse acquisition with tpc treated as
the accounting acquirer. accordingly, this transaction was accounted for as a
purchase business combination, using tpcs historical financial information and
applying fair value estimates to the acquired assets, liabilities and
commitments of spc as of april 1, 2004. (see note 2 for a description of the
fair value adjustments recorded). beginning on april 1, 2004, the results of
operations and financial condition of spc were consolidated with tpcs results
of operations and financial condition. accordingly, all financial information
presented herein for the twelve months ended december 31, 2005 reflects the
consolidated accounts of spc and tpc. the financial information presented
herein for the twelve months ended december 31, 2004 reflects only the accounts
of tpc for the three months ended march 31, 2004 and the consolidated accounts
of spc and tpc for the nine months ended december 31, 2004. the financial
information presented herein for 2003 reflects the accounts of tpc. certain
reclassifications have been made to prior years financial statements to
conform to the current years presentation. significant intercompany
transactions and balances have been eliminated.
in connection with the
merger, each issued and outstanding share of tpc class a and class b common
stock (including the associated preferred stock purchase rights) was exchanged
for 0.4334 of a share of the companys common stock. share and per share
amounts for all periods presented have been restated to reflect the exchange of
tpcs common stock, par value $0.01 per share, for the companys common stock
without designated par value. common stock and additional paid-in capital in
the consolidated balance sheet were also restated to give effect to the
difference in par value of the exchanged shares. cash was paid in lieu of
fractional shares of the companys common stock. immediately following
consummation of the merger, historical tpc shareholders held approximately 66%
of the companys common stock. for further information regarding the merger,
see note 2.
in 2005, the company and nuveen investments, inc. (nuveen investments),
the companys asset management subsidiary, jointly announced that the company
would implement a program to divest its 78% equity interest in nuveen
investments, which constituted the companys asset management segment and was
acquired as part of the merger on april 1, 2004. the company completed the
divestiture through a series of transactions in 2005. the companys share of
nuveen investments results was classified as discontinued operations on the
consolidated statement of income, and the companys results for prior periods
were reclassified to be consistent with the 2005 presentation. the companys
ownership in nuveen investments assets and liabilities as of december 31, 2004
were netted and reported as net assets of discontinued operations on the
companys consolidated balance sheet. see note 3.
the preparation of the
consolidated financial statements in conformity with u.s. generally accepted
accounting principles requires management to make estimates and assumptions
that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of
contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial
statements and the reported amounts of revenues and claims and expenses during
the reporting period. actual results could differ from those estimates.
adoption of new accounting standards
american
jobs creation act  repatriation of foreign earnings
on october 22,
2004, congress enacted the american jobs
creation act (ajca) which provided a temporary incentive for u.s.
corporations to repatriate earnings previously reinvested in foreign
subsidiaries to obtain an 85% dividends received deduction. in december 2004,
fsp no. 109-2, accounting and disclosure
guidance for the foreign earnings repatriation provision within the american
jobs creation act of 2004 was issued. this fsp provides accounting
and disclosure guidance on how to apply fasb
statement of financial accounting standards no. 109, accounting for income taxes, to the repatriation provision
of the ajca. in the fourth quarter of 2005, the company approved a domestic
reinvestment plan in accordance with the ajca to repatriate foreign earnings
prior to december 31, 2005. in december 2005, the company repatriated $158
million of cumulative foreign earnings invested outside of the united states,
which resulted in an increase in income tax expense of $8 million for the year
ended december 31, 2005.
accounting policies not yet adopted
share-based payment
in december 2004, the fasb
issued revised statement of financial accounting standards no. 123, share-based payment (fas 123r), an
amendment to fas 123 and a replacement of apb opinion no. 25, accounting for stock issued to employees,
and its related implementation guidance. fas 123r requires public entities to
measure the cost of employee services received in exchange for an award of
equity instruments based on the grant-date fair value of the award, and to
recognize that cost over the requisite service period.
fas 123r, which became
effective january 1, 2006, requires entities that use the fair-value method of
either recognition or disclosure under fas 123, to apply a modified version of
the prospective application. under modified prospective application,
compensation cost is recognized on or after the effective date for all unvested
awards, based on their grant-date fair value as calculated under fas 123 for
either recognition or pro forma disclosure purposes.
in addition, the accounting
for certain grants of equity awards to individuals who are retirement eligible
on the date of grant has been clarified. fas 123r states that an employees
share-based award becomes vested at the date that the employees right to receive
or retain equity shares is no longer contingent on the satisfaction of a
market, performance or service condition. accordingly, awards granted to
retirement eligible employees are not contingent on satisfying a service
condition and therefore are recognized at fair value on the date of the grant.
additionally, the period over which cost is recognized for awards granted to
those who become retirement eligible before the vesting date, will be from the
grant date to the retirement eligible date rather than to the vesting date.
this guidance is to be applied prospectively to new or modified awards granted
upon adoption of fas 123r.
the company adopted the fair
value method of accounting under fas 123 on january 1, 2003. the impact of fas 123r will be: a.) the
recognition of additional expense in earnings for the remaining unamortized
expense relating to unvested awards granted prior to the companys adoption of
fas 123 (january 1, 2003) and which remain outstanding on the date of adoption
of fas 123r and b.) the accelerated recognition of compensation cost
attributable to awards granted to retiree eligible employees or to employees
that become retirement eligible before an awards vesting date for which the
right to receive or retain equity shares is no longer contingent on the
satisfaction of a market performance or service condition. the company does not
expect the impact of adopting fas 123r to have a significant effect on
operations, financial condition or liquidity.
accounting
by insurance enterprises for deferred acquisition costs in connection with
modifications or exchanges of insurance contracts
in september 2005, the accounting standards executive committee (acsec)
issued statement of position 05-1,
accounting by insurance enterprises for deferred acquisition costs in
connection with modifications or exchanges of insurance contracts (sop 05-1). sop 05-1 provides guidance
on accounting by insurance enterprises for deferred acquisition costs (dac) on
internal replacements of insurance and investment contracts other than those
specifically described in fas 97, accounting
and reporting by insurance enterprises for certain long-duration contracts and
for realized gains and losses from the sale of investments. sop 05-1
defines an internal replacement as a modification in product benefits,
features, rights, or coverages that occurs by the exchange of a contract for a
new contract, or by amendment, endorsement, or rider to a contract, or by the
election of a feature or coverage within a contract.
sop 05-1 is effective for internal replacements occurring in fiscal
years beginning after december 15, 2006, with earlier adoption encouraged. the
company does not expect the impact of adopting sop 05-1 to have a significant
effect on operations, financial condition or liquidity.
accounting policies
investments
fixed maturities include
bonds, notes and redeemable preferred stocks. fixed maturities are valued based
upon quoted market prices or dealer quotes, or if quoted market prices or
dealer quotes are not available, discounted expected cash flows using market
rates commensurate with the credit quality and maturity of the investment. also
included in fixed maturities are loan-backed and structured securities, which
are amortized using the retrospective method. the effective yield used to
determine amortization is calculated based upon actual historical and projected
future cash flows, which are obtained from a widely-accepted securities data
provider. fixed maturities, including instruments subject to securities lending
agreements, are classified as available for sale and are reported at fair
value, with unrealized investment gains and losses, net of income taxes,
credited or charged directly to other comprehensive income.
equity securities, which
include common and nonredeemable preferred stocks, are classified as available
for sale and carried at fair value based on quoted market prices. changes in
fair values of equity securities, net of income tax, are charged or credited
directly to other comprehensive income.
mortgage loans are carried
at amortized cost. a mortgage loan is considered impaired when it is probable
that the company will be unable to collect principal and interest amounts due.
for mortgage loans that are determined to be impaired, a reserve is established
for the difference between the amortized cost and fair market value of the
underlying collateral. in estimating fair value, the company uses interest
rates reflecting the current real estate financing market returns. impaired
loans were not significant at december 31, 2005 and 2004.
the companys real estate
investments include warehouses and office buildings and other commercial land
and properties that are directly owned. real estate properties are carried at
cost less accumulated depreciation. buildings are depreciated on a straight
line basis over the shorter of the expected useful life of the building or 39
years. accumulated depreciation on real estate held for investment purposes was
$48 million and $22 million at december 31, 2005 and 2004, respectively.
the carrying value of real
estate properties are reviewed for impairment when events or changes in
circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable. the
review for impairment includes an estimate of the undiscounted cash flows
expected to result from the use and eventual disposition of the real estate
property. an impairment loss is recognized if the expected future undiscounted
cash flows are less than the carrying value of the real estate property.
rental income is recognized
on a straight line basis over the lease term. see note 6.
real estate held for sale is
carried at the lower of cost or fair value less estimated costs to sell. fair
value is established at the time of acquisition by internal analysis or
external appraisers, using discounted cash flow analyses and other acceptable
techniques. thereafter, impairment is taken if the carrying value of the
property exceeds its current fair value less estimated costs to sell. the
company had no real estate held for sale at december 31, 2005 or 2004.
accrual of income is
suspended on fixed maturities or mortgage loans that are in default, or on
which it is likely that future payments will not be made as scheduled. interest
income on investments in default is recognized only as payment is received.
investments included in the consolidated balance sheet that were not
income-producing for the preceding 12 months were not significant.
short-term securities,
consisting primarily of money market instruments and other debt issues
purchased with a maturity of less than one year, are carried at amortized cost,
which approximates fair value.
other investments include:
venture capital investments, through direct ownership and limited partnerships;
private equity limited partnerships; joint ventures, other limited
partnerships, and trading securities. certain venture capital investments that
are controlled by the company are consolidated in the companys financial
statements. the company uses the equity method of accounting for joint
ventures, limited partnerships and certain private equity securities.
undistributed income is reported in net investment income. trading securities
are marked to market with the change in fair value recognized in net investment
income during the current period.
investment gains and losses
net realized investment
gains and losses are included as a component of pretax revenues based upon
specific identification of the investments sold on the trade date. a decline in
the value of a security below its amortized cost basis is assessed to determine
if the decline is other-than-temporary. if so, the security is deemed to be
impaired, and a charge is recorded in net realized investment gains and losses
equal to the difference between fair value and carrying value.
reinsurance recoverables
amounts recoverable from
reinsurers are estimated in a manner consistent with the associated claim
liability. such recoverables are reported net of an allowance for estimated
uncollectible reinsurance recoverables and amounts due from known reinsurer
insolvencies. the company evaluates and monitors the financial condition of its
reinsurers under voluntary reinsurance arrangements to minimize its exposure to
significant losses from reinsurer insolvencies.
deferred acquisition costs
amounts which vary with and
are primarily related to the production of new insurance contracts, primarily
commissions and premium-related taxes, are deferred and amortized pro rata over
the contract periods in which the related premiums are earned. deferred
acquisition costs are reviewed to determine if they are recoverable from future
income and, if not, are charged to expense. future investment income
attributable to related premiums is taken into account in measuring the
recoverability of the carrying value of this asset. all other acquisition
expenses are charged to operations as incurred.
contractholder receivables and payables
under certain workers
compensation insurance contracts with deductible features, the company is
obligated to pay the claimant for the full amount of the claim. the company is
subsequently reimbursed by the policyholder for the deductible amount. these
amounts are included on a gross basis in the consolidated balance sheet in
contractholder payables and contractholder receivables, respectively.
goodwill and intangible assets
goodwill is tested for
impairment at least annually using a two-step process. the first step is
performed to identify potential impairment and, if necessary, the second step
is performed for the purpose of measuring the amount of impairment, if any.
indefinite-lived intangible assets are tested for impairment at least annually.
impairment is recognized only if the carrying amount of the intangible asset
exceeds its fair value.
other intangible assets that
are not deemed to have an indefinite useful life are amortized over their
useful lives. the carrying amount of intangible assets that are not deemed to
have an indefinite useful life is regularly reviewed for indicators of
impairments in value. impairment is recognized only if the carrying amount of
the intangible asset is not recoverable from its undiscounted cash flows and is
measured as the difference between the carrying amount and the fair value of
the asset.
claims and claim adjustment expense reserves
claims and claim adjustment
expense reserves represent estimated provisions for both reported and
unreported claims incurred and related expenses. the reserves are adjusted
regularly based upon experience. included in the claims and claim adjustment
expense reserves in the consolidated balance sheet are certain reserves
discounted to the present value of estimated future payments. the liabilities
for losses for some long-term disability payments under workers compensation
insurance and workers compensation excess insurance, which totaled $1.92
billion and $1.99 billion at december 31, 2005 and 2004, respectively, were
discounted using a rate of 5% at december 31, 2005 and a range of rates from
3.5% to 5% at december 31, 2004. reserves related to certain fixed and
determinable asbestos-related settlements, where all payment amounts and their
timing are known, totaled $34 million and $67 million at december 31, 2005 and
2004, respectively. these reserves were discounted using a rate of 2.6% at
december 31, 2005, and a range of rates from 2.3% to 2.6% at december 31, 2004.
reserves for certain assumed reinsurance business acquired in the merger were
discounted using a range of rates from 5% to 7.5%, and totaled $79 million and
$126 million at december 31, 2005 and 2004, respectively.
in determining claims and
claim adjustment expense reserves, the company carries on a continuing review
of its overall position, its reserving techniques and its reinsurance. the
reserves are also reviewed periodically by a qualified actuary employed by the
company. these reserves represent the estimated ultimate cost of all incurred
claims and claim adjustment expenses. since the reserves are based on
estimates, the ultimate liability may be more or less than such reserves. the
effects of changes in such estimated reserves are included in the results of
operations in the period in which the estimates are changed. such changes may
be material to the results of operations and financial condition and could
occur in a future period.
securities lending payable
the company engages in
securities lending activities from which it generates net investment income
from the lending of certain of its investments to other institutions for short
periods of time. effective april 1, 2004, the company entered into a new
securities lending agreement. borrowers of these securities provide collateral
equal to at least 102% of the market value of the loaned securities plus
accrued interest. this collateral is held by a third-party custodian, and the
company has the right to access the collateral only in the event that the
institution borrowing the companys securities is in default under the lending
agreement. therefore, the company does not recognize the receipt of the
collateral held by the third-party custodian or the obligation to return the
collateral. the loaned securities remain a recorded asset of the company.
other liabilities
included in other
liabilities in the consolidated balance sheet is the companys estimate of its
liability for guaranty fund and other insurance-related assessments. the
liability for expected state guaranty fund and other premium-based assessments
is recognized as the company writes or becomes obligated to write or renew the
premiums on which the assessments are expected to be based. the liability for
loss-based assessments is recognized as the related losses are incurred. at
december 31, 2005 and 2004, the company had a liability of $278 million and
$249 million, respectively, for guaranty fund and other assessments and related
recoverables of $12 million and $31 million, respectively. the liability for
such assessments and the related recoverables are not discounted for the time
value of money. the assessments are expected to be paid over a period ranging
from one year to the life expectancy of certain workers compensation claimants
and the recoveries are expected to occur over the same period of time.
also included in other
liabilities is an accrual for policyholder dividends. certain insurance
contracts, primarily workers compensation, are participating whereby dividends
are paid to policyholders in accordance with contract provisions. net written
premiums for participating dividend policies were approximately 1% of total
company net written premiums for each of the years ended december 31, 2005,
2004 and 2003. policyholder dividends are accrued against earnings using best
available estimates of amounts to be paid. the liability accrued for
policyholder dividends totaled $30 million and $28 million at december 31, 2005
and 2004, respectively.
statutory accounting practices
the companys insurance
subsidiaries, domiciled principally in the states of connecticut and minnesota,
prepare statutory financial statements in accordance with the accounting
practices prescribed or permitted by the insurance departments of the states of
domicile. prescribed statutory accounting practices are those practices that
are incorporated directly or by reference in state laws, regulations, and
general administrative rules applicable to all insurance enterprises domiciled
in a particular state. permitted statutory accounting practices include
practices not prescribed by the domiciliary state, but allowed by the
domiciliary state regulatory authority. the impact of any permitted accounting
practices on statutory surplus of the company is not material.
premiums and unearned premium reserves
premiums are recognized as
revenues pro rata over the policy period. unearned premium reserves represent
the unexpired portion of policy premiums. accrued retrospective premiums are
included in premium balances receivable. premium balances receivable are
reported net of an allowance for estimated uncollectible premium amounts.
ceded premiums are charged
to income over the applicable term of the various reinsurance contracts with
third party reinsurers. prepaid reinsurance premiums represent the unexpired
portion of premiums ceded to reinsurers and are reported as part of other
assets.
fee income
fee income includes
servicing fees from carriers and revenues from large deductible policies and service
contracts and is recognized pro rata over the contract or policy periods.
other revenues
other revenues include
revenues from premium installment charges, which are recognized as collected,
revenues of noninsurance subsidiaries other than fee income and gains and
losses on dispositions of assets and other miscellaneous revenues.
income taxes
the company recognizes
deferred income tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax effects
attributable to temporary differences between the financial statement and tax
return bases of assets and liabilities, based on enacted tax rates and other
provisions of the tax law. the effect of a change in tax laws or rates on
deferred tax assets and liabilities is recognized in income in the period in
which such change is enacted. deferred tax assets are reduced by a valuation
allowance if it is more likely than not that all or some portion of the
deferred tax assets will not be realized.
foreign currency translation
the company assigns
functional currencies to its foreign operations, which are generally the
currencies of the local operating environment. foreign currency amounts are
remeasured to the functional currency, and the resulting foreign exchange gains
or losses are reflected in the statement of income. functional currency amounts
are then translated into u.s. dollars. the unrealized gain or loss from this
translation, net of tax, is recorded as a part of shareholders equity. the
change in unrealized foreign currency translation gain or loss during the year,
net of tax, is a component of comprehensive income. both the remeasurement and
translation are calculated using current exchange rates for the balance sheets
and average exchange rates for the statements of operations.
stock-based compensation
the company has an employee
stock incentive compensation plan that includes stock-based awards of stock
options, restricted stock and deferred stock.
for stock-based employee
awards granted, modified, or settled after december 31, 2002, the company applies
the fas 123 fair value method of accounting. under this method, compensation
cost is measured at the grant date based on the fair value of the award and
recognized ratably over the vesting period. for restricted stock awards, the
fair value is measured at the market price of a share on the grant date while
for stock option awards the fair value is derived by the application of an
option pricing model at date of grant.
for stock-based employee
awards granted prior to january 1, 2003, the company accounts for these awards
under the recognition and measurement principles of accounting principles board
opinion no. 25 (apb25), accounting
for stock issued to employees, and related interpretations using
the prospective recognition transition alternative of fas 148. for restricted
stock awards, the market value on grant date of these awards is recognized as
compensation expense ratably over the vesting period. for stock option awards,
the awards are granted at an exercise price equal to the market value of the
underlying common stock on the date of the grant and accordingly there has been
no employee compensation expense recognized in earnings for the stock option
awards. the accounting for the awards granted prior to january 1, 2003 using
apb 25 will cease upon adoption of fas 123r january 1, 2006 (see note 1, accounting policies not yet adopted - share-based payment).
in connection with the merger in april 2004,
the company assumed 23 million outstanding spc stock options, of which 4
million remained unvested and assumed approximately 240,000 of outstanding spc
restricted stock awards related to spc equity-based compensation plans. these
stock options and restricted stock awards retained the same terms and conditions
that were applicable prior to the merger. at april 1, 2004, the estimated fair
values of the unvested stock option awards and the restricted stock awards were
$35 million and $9 million, respectively, and were included in unearned
compensation as a separate component of equity. the unearned compensation
expense is being recognized as a charge to income over the remaining vesting
period.
the following table
illustrates the effect on net income and earnings per share for each period
indicated as if the company had applied the fair value recognition provisions
of fas 123 to all outstanding and unvested stock-based employee awards.
(for the year ended december
31, in millions, except per share data)
net income as reported
$
1,622
$
$
1,696
add: stock-based
employee compensation expense included in reported net income, net of related
tax effects (1)
deduct:
stock-based employee compensation expense determined under fair value based
method, net of related tax effects (2)
(76
)
(75
)
(73
)
net
income pro forma
$
1,610
$
$
1,641
earnings
per share
basicas
reported
$
2.39
$
1.56
$
3.91
basicpro forma
2.37
1.52
3.79
dilutedas
reported
2.33
1.53
3.80
dilutedpro
forma
2.31
1.49
3.76
(1) represents compensation expense on all restricted stock and
stock option awards granted after january 1, 2003.
(2) includes the compensation expense added back in (1).
derivative financial instruments
the company may use
derivative financial instruments, including interest rate swaps, equity swaps,
credit derivatives, options, forward contracts and financial futures, as a
means of hedging exposure to interest rate, equity price change and foreign
currency risk. the companys insurance subsidiaries do not hold or issue
derivative instruments for trading purposes. the company recognizes all
derivatives, including certain derivative instruments embedded in other
contracts, as either assets or liabilities in the consolidated balance sheet
and measures those instruments at fair value. where applicable, hedge
accounting is used to account for derivatives. to qualify for hedge accounting,
the changes in value of the derivative must be expected to substantially offset
the changes in value of the hedged item. hedges are monitored to ensure that
there is a high correlation between the change in the value of the derivative
instruments and the change in value of the hedged investment. derivatives that
do not qualify for hedge accounting are carried at fair value with the changes
in fair value reflected in the consolidated statement of income in net realized
investment gains (losses).
interest rate swaps, equity
swaps, credit derivatives, options and forward contracts were not significant
at december 31, 2005 and 2004.
nature of operations
the company is organized
into three reportable business segments: commercial, specialty and personal.
these segments reflect the manner by which the company manages its property and
casualty insurance products and insurance-related services and represent an
aggregation of these products and services based on type of customer, how the
business is marketed, and the manner in which the business is underwritten.
beginning in the second
quarter of 2005, the national accounts underwriting group includes the
companys discover re operation. discover res results were reclassified to the
commercial segment from the specialty segment to align the segment reporting
structure with the manner in which the companys business is managed after
changes in the companys management structure in 2005. prior period amounts
were restated to reflect the reclassification of discover re.
invested and other assets
and net investment income (nii) of historical tpc had been specifically
identified by reporting segment prior to the merger. beginning in the second
quarter of 2004, the company developed a methodology to allocate nii and invested
assets to the identified segments. this methodology allocates pretax nii based
upon an investable funds concept, which takes into account liabilities (net of
non-invested assets) and appropriate capital considerations for each segment.
the investment yield for investable funds reflects the duration of the loss
reserves future cash flows, the interest rate environment at the time the
losses were incurred and a+ rated corporate debt instruments. this duration
yield is compared to the average portfolio yield and a new average yield is
determined. it is this average yield that is used in the calculation of nii on
investable funds. yields are updated annually. invested assets are allocated to
segments in proportion to the pretax allocation of nii. it is not practicable to apply this
methodology to historical businesses and, as such, actual (versus allocated)
nii is included in revenues and operating income of the restated segments for
periods prior to the merger. the company believes that the differences are not
significant to a comparison with the new segment presentation. it is also not
practicable to present total assets for restated commercial and specialty
segments for periods prior to the merger.
the specific business
segments are as follows:
commercial
the commercial segment
offers a broad array of property and casualty insurance and insurance-related
services to its clients. commercial is organized into the following three
marketing and underwriting groups, each of which focuses on a particular client
base and which collectively comprise commercials core operations:
commercial accounts serves primarily mid-sized businesses for
casualty products and large and mid-sized businesses for property products. in
addition to the traditional middle market, commercial accounts includes seven
units dedicated to unique business needs.
select accounts serves small businesses and offers
commercial multi-peril, property, general liability, commercial auto and
workers compensation insurance.
national accounts comprises three distinct business units. the
largest provides casualty products and services to large companies, with
particular emphasis on workers compensation, general liability and automobile
liability. national accounts also includes the commercial residual market
business, which primarily offers workers compensation products and services to
the involuntary market. national accounts also includes discover re, which
provides unbundled property and casualty insurance products to insureds who
utilize programs such as self-insurance, collateralized deductibles and captive
reinsurers.
commercial also includes the
special liability group (which manages the companys asbestos and environmental
liabilities); the assumed reinsurance, health care, and certain international
and other runoff operations; and policies written by the companys gulf
operation (gulf), which was placed into runoff during the second quarter of
2004. these operations are collectively referred to as commercial other.
net written premiums by
market were as follows:
(for the year ended december31,
in millions)
commercial accounts
$
4,386
$
4,210
$
3,251
select accounts
2,722
2,555
2,047
national accounts
1,230
1,040
total
commercial core
8,338
7,805
6,129
commercial other
total
commercial
$
8,429
$
8,311
$
6,862
specialty
the specialty segment was
created upon the merger of tpc and spc. it combined spcs specialty operations,
including spcs bond and construction operations, with tpcs bond and
construction operations, which were included in tpcs commercial segment prior
to the merger. the specialty segment provides a full range of standard and specialized
insurance coverages and services through dedicated underwriting, claims
handling and risk management groups. the segment comprises two primary groups:
domestic specialty and international specialty.
domestic specialty includes several marketing and underwriting
groups, each of which possesses customer expertise and offers products and
services to address its respective customers specific needs. these groups
include financial and professional services, bond, construction, technology,
ocean marine, oil and gas, public sector, underwriting facilities and
umbrella/excess& surplus group.
international specialty includes coverages marketed and underwritten
to several specialty customer groups within the united kingdom, canada and the
republic of ireland and the companys participation in lloyds.
in november2005, the
company sold its personal catastrophe risk business, which had been included in
the specialty segment. in accordance with terms of the agreement, the company
retained responsibility for the pre-sale loss and loss adjustment expense
reserves related to this business and remains responsible for any changes in
estimates in those reserves through a quota-share reinsurance agreement. the
impact of this transaction is not material to the companys ongoing operations.
net written premiums by
market were as follows:
(for the year ended december31,
in millions)
bond
$
1,267
$
1,183
$
construction
financial and professional services
domestic specialty other
1,605
1,186
total
domestic specialty
4,638
3,849
1,255
international specialty
1,091
total
specialty
$
5,729
$
4,771
$
1,258
personal
personal writes virtually
all types of property and casualty insurance covering personal risks. the
primary coverages in personal are automobile and homeowners insurance sold to
individuals. these products are distributed through independent agents,
sponsoring organizations such as employee and affinity groups, and joint
marketing arrangements with other insurers.
automobile policies provide
coverage for liability to others for both bodily injury and property damage,
and for physical damage to an insureds own vehicle from collision and various
other perils. in addition, many states require policies to provide first-party
personal injury protection, frequently referred to as no-fault coverage.
homeowners policies are
available for dwellings, condominiums, mobile homes and rental property
contents. protection against losses to dwellings and contents from a wide
variety of perils is included in these policies, as well as coverage for
liability arising from ownership or occupancy.
net written premiums by
product line were as follows:
(for the year ended december31,
in millions)
automobile
$
3,477
$
3,433
$
3,054
homeowners and other
2,751
2,496
2,027
total
personal
$
6,228
$
5,929
$
5,081
catastrophe
exposure
the company has geographic
exposure to catastrophe losses in certain areas of the country. catastrophes
can be caused by various natural and man-made events including hurricanes,
windstorms, earthquakes, hail, severe winter weather, explosions and fires. the
incidence and severity of catastrophes are inherently unpredictable. the extent
of losses from a catastrophe is a function of both the total amount of insured
exposure in the area affected by the event and the severity of the event. most
catastrophes are restricted to small geographic areas; however, hurricanes and
earthquakes mayproduce significant damage in larger areas, especially
those that are heavily populated. the company generally seeks to reduce its
exposure to catastrophes through individual risk selection and the purchase of
catastrophe reinsurance.
there are risks which impact
the estimation of ultimate costs for catastrophes. for example, the estimation
of reserves related to hurricanes can be affected by the inability of the
company and its insureds to access portions of the impacted areas, the
complexity of factors contributing to the losses, the legal and regulatory
uncertainties and the nature of the information available to establish the
reserves. complex factors include, but are not limited to: determining whether
damage was caused by flooding versus wind; evaluating general liability and
pollution exposures; estimating additional living expenses; the impact of
demand surge; infrastructure disruption; fraud; the effect of mold damage and
business interruption costs; and reinsurance collectibility. the timing of a
catastrophes occurrence, such as at or near the end of a reporting period, can
also affect the information available to the company in estimating reserves for
that reporting period. the estimates related to catastrophes are adjusted as
actual claims emerge.
terrorism
risk insurance act of 2002 and terrorism risk insurance extension act of 2005
on november26, 2002,
the terrorism risk insurance act of 2002 (the terrorism act) was enacted into
federal law and established the terrorism risk insurance program (the program),
a temporary federal program in the department of the treasury, that provided
for a system of shared public and private compensation for insured losses resulting
from acts of terrorism or war committed by or on behalf of a foreign interest.
the program was scheduled to terminate on december31, 2005. on december22,
2005, the terrorism risk insurance extension act of 2005 (the terrorism
extension act) was enacted into federal law, reauthorizing the program through december31,
2007, while reducing the federal role under the program. in order for a loss to
be covered under the program (subject losses), the loss must meet certain
aggregate industry loss minimums that vary by program year of amounts $100
million or less, and must be the result of an event that is certified as an act
of terrorism by the u.s. secretary of the treasury. the original program
excluded from participation certain of the following types of insurance:
federal crop insurance, private mortgage insurance, financial guaranty
insurance, medical malpractice insurance, health or life insurance, flood
insurance, and reinsurance. the terrorism extension act exempted from coverage
certain additional types of insurance, including commercial automobile,
professional liability (other than directors and officers), surety, burglary
and theft, and farm-owners multi-peril. in the case of a war declared by
congress, only workers compensation losses are covered by the terrorism act
and the terrorism extension act. both acts generally require that all
commercial property casualty insurers licensed in the united states participate
in the program. under the program, a participating insurer is entitled to be
reimbursed by the federal government for a percentage of subject losses, after
an insurer deductible, subject to an annual cap. the federal reimbursement
percentage remains at 90% for 2006, but decreases to 85% in 2007. in each case,
the deductible is calculated by applying the deductible percentage to the
insurers direct earned premiums for covered lines from the calendar year
immediately preceding the applicable year. the deductible under the program was
7% for 2003, 10% for 2004 and 15% for 2005, and will be 17.5% for 2006 and 20%
for 2007. the companys estimated deductible under the program is $1.91 billion
for 2006. the annual cap limits the amount of aggregate subject losses for all
participating insurers to $100 billion. once subject losses have reached the
$100 billion aggregate during a program year, there is no additional
reimbursement from the u.s. treasury and an insurer that has met its deductible
for the program year is not liable for any losses (or portion thereof) that
exceed the $100 billion cap. the company had no terrorism-related losses in
2005, 2004 or 2003.
2. merger
on april1, 2004, tpc
merged with a subsidiary of spc, as a result of which tpc became a wholly-owned
subsidiary of the st. paul travelers companies,inc. for accounting
purposes, this transaction was accounted for as a reverse acquisition with tpc
treated as the accounting acquirer. accordingly, this transaction was accounted
for as a purchase business combination, using tpcs historical financial
information and applying fair value estimates to the acquired assets,
liabilities and commitments of spc as of april1, 2004.
determination
of purchase price
the stock price used in
determining the purchase price was based on an average of the closing prices of
spc common stock for the two trading days before through the two trading days
after spc and tpc announced their merger agreement on november17, 2003.
the purchase price also included the fair value of the spc stock options, the
fair value adjustment to spcs preferred stock, and other costs of the
transaction. the purchase price was approximately $8.76 billion, and was
calculated as follows:
(in millions, except stock
price per share)
number of
shares of spc common stock outstanding as of april1, 2004
229.3
spcs
average stock price for the two trading days before through the two trading
days after november17, 2003, the day spc and tpc announced their merger
$
36.86
fair value
of spcs common stock
$
8,452
fair value
of approximately 23 million spc stock options
excess of
fair value over book value of spcs convertible preferred stock outstanding,
net of the excess of the fair value over the book value of the related
guaranteed obligation
transaction
costs of tpc
purchase
price
$
8,756
the primary reasons for the
acquisition were, among other things, a) to create a stronger company that
would provide significant benefits to shareholders and to customers alike; b)
to capitalize on a common strategic focus on delivering the highest value to
customers, agents and brokers and, working together, to expand future
opportunities and capture new efficiencies; and c) to strengthen the combined
companys position as a leading provider of property and casualty insurance
products.
allocation
of the purchase price
the purchase price was
allocated based on an estimate of the fair value of the assets acquired and
liabilities assumed as of april1, 2004, as follows:
(in millions)
net tangible
assets (1)
$
5,351
total
investments (2)
deferred
policy acquisition costs (3)
(100
)
deferred
federal income taxes (4)
goodwill (5)(8)
1,030
other
intangible assets, including the fair value adjustment of claim and claim
adjustment expense reserves and reinsurance recoverables of $191 (6)(7)(8)
net assets
of discontinued operations (8)
2,143
other assets
(2)
(103
)
claims and
claim adjustment expense reserves (3)
(26
)
debt (2)
(333
)
other
liabilities (2)
(485
)
allocated
purchase price
$
8,756
(1) reflects spcs shareholders equity of $6,439
million, less spcs historical goodwill of $950 million and intangible assets
of $138 million.
(2) represents adjustments for fair value.
(3) represents certain adjustments to conformspcs
accounting policies to those of tpcs that affected the purchase price
allocation.
(4) represents a deferred tax liability
associated with adjustments to fair value of all assets and liabilities
included herein excluding goodwill, as this transaction is not treated as a
purchase for tax purposes.
(5) represents the excess of the purchase price
(cost) over the amounts assigned to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed.
none of the goodwill is deductible for tax purposes. the decrease in goodwill
compared with that originally reported at the merger date was due to the
adjustment related to nuveen investments described in (8)below, as well
as certain purchase accounting and tax adjustments since the completion of the
merger.
(6) represents identified finite and indefinite
life intangible assets, primarily customer-related insurance. see note 4.
(7) an adjustment has been applied to spcs
claims and claim adjustment expense reserves and reinsurance recoverables at
the acquisition date to estimate their fair value. the fair value adjustment of
$191 million was based on managements estimate of nominal claim and claim
expense reserves and reinsurance recoverables (after adjusting for conformity
with the acquirers accounting policy on discounting of workers compensation
reserves), expected payment patterns, the april1, 2004 u.s. treasury spot
rate yield curve, a leverage ratio assumption (reserves to statutory surplus),
and a cost of capital expressed as a spread over risk-free rates. the method
used calculates a risk adjustment to a risk-free discounted reserve that will,
if reserves run off as expected, produce results that yield the assumed
cost-of-capital on the capital supporting the loss reserves. the fair value
adjustment is reported as an intangible asset on the consolidated balance
sheet, and the amounts measured in accordance with the acquirers accounting
policies for insurance contracts are reported as partof the claims and
claim adjustment expense reserves and reinsurance recoverables. the intangible
asset will be recognized into income over the expected payment pattern. because
the time value of money and the risk adjustment (cost of capital) components of
the intangible asset run off at different rates, the amount recognized in
income maybe a net benefit in some periods and a net expense in other
periods.
(8) the merger-related assets and liabilities of
nuveen investments that were included in the allocation of the purchase price
were removed from the respective lines of the companys consolidated balance
sheet and are reported on a net basis under the above caption net assets of
discontinued operations at december31, 2004. included in net assets of
discontinued operations at december31, 2004 were goodwill of $1.70
billion and intangible assets of $651 million related to nuveen investments.
see note 3.
identification
and valuation of intangible assets
intangible assets subject to
amortization (excluding the nuveen investments intangible assets noted in item
8 of the allocation of the purchase price previously presented) were as
follows:
(in millions)
amountassigned
as of april1,
weighted-
average
amortization
period
major
intangible asset class
customer-related
(a)
$
7.8years
marketing-related
2.0 years
fair value
adjustment on claims and claim adjustment expense reserves and reinsurance
recoverables (b)
30.0 years
total
$
(a) primarily includes customer-related insurance
intangibles based on rates derived from expected business retention and
profitability levels.
(b) see item 7 of the allocation of the purchase
price previously presented.
intangible assets not
subject to amortization were as follows:
(in millions)
amountassigned
as of april1,
major intangible asset class
contract-based
total
$
supplemental
scheduleof noncash investing and financing activities
the allocated purchase price
calculated above results in an estimate of the fair value of assets acquired
and liabilities assumed as of the merger date, as follows:
(in millions)
asofapril1,
assets
acquired
$
42,989
liabilities
assumed, including debt obligations totaling $3.98 billion
(34,233
)
allocated
purchase price
$
8,756
pro forma
results
the following unaudited pro
forma information presents the combined results of operations of tpc and spc
for the twelve months ended december31, 2004 and 2003, respectively, with
pro forma purchase accounting adjustments as if the acquisition had been
consummated as of the beginning of the periods presented. this pro forma
information is not necessarily indicative of what would have occurred had the
acquisition and related transactions been made on the dates indicated, or of
future results of the company.
(for the year ended december31,
in millions, except per share data)
revenue
$
25,195
$
23,683
net income
$
1,080
$
2,123
net income per sharebasic
$
1.61
$
3.18
net income per sharediluted
$
1.58
$
3.09
3. discontinued operations
in march2005, the
company and nuveen investments jointly announced that the company would
implement a program to divest its 78% equity interest in nuveen investments,
which constituted the companys asset management segment and was acquired as partof
the merger on april1, 2004. the divestiture was completed through a seriesof
transactions in the second and third quarters of 2005, resulting in net pretax
cash proceeds of $2.40 billion.
in conjunction with these
transactions, the company recorded a pretax gain on disposal of $345 million
($224 million after-tax) for the year ended december31, 2005.
additionally, the company recorded a net operating loss from discontinued
operations of $663 million for the year ended december31, 2005,
consisting primarily of $710 million of tax expense which resulted from the
difference between the tax basis and the gaap carrying value of the companys
investment in nuveen investments, partially offset by the companys share of
nuveen investments net income for 2005.
the assets and liabilities
related to nuveen investments were removed from the respective lines of the
companys consolidated balance sheet and reported under the caption net assets
of discontinued operations in the consolidated balance sheet at december31,
2004. the current and deferred tax liabilities generated by the difference
between the companys tax basis and the gaap basis of its investment in nuveen
investments are reported on the companys consolidated balance sheet as partof
the companys current and deferred tax liabilities and are not included in the net
assets of discontinued operations line item of the consolidated balance sheet.
in 2005, the company has
separately disclosed the operating, investing and financing cash flows
attributable to its discontinued operations (nuveen investments), which in prior
quarters were reported as components of cash flows from continuing operations.
the consolidated cash flow statement for the year ended december31, 2004
has been revised to be consistent with the 2005 presentation.
4. intangible assets and
goodwill
intangible
assets
the following presents a
summary of the companys intangible assets by major asset classas of december31,
2005 and 2004:
(at december31 2005, in
millions)
gross
carrying
amount
accumulated
amortization
net
intangibles
subject to amortization
customer-related
$
1,036
$
$
marketing-related
fair value
adjustment on claims and claim adjustment expense reserves and reinsurance
recoverables (1)
(70
)
total
intangible assets subject to amortization
1,247
intangible
assets not subject to amortization
contract-based
total
intangible assets not subject to amortization
total
intangible assets
$
1,267
$
$
(at december31 2004, in
millions)
gross
carrying
amount
accumulated
amortization
net
intangibles
subject to amortization
customer-related
$
1,032
$
$
marketing-related
fair value
adjustment on claims and claim adjustment expense reserves and reinsurance
recoverables (1)
(58
)
total
intangible assets subject to amortization
1,243
1,042
intangible
assets not subject to amortization
contract-based
total
intangible assets not subject to amortization
total
intangible assets
$
1,263
$
$
1,062
(1) the time value of money and the risk margin
(cost of capital) components of the intangible asset runoff at different rates,
and as such, the amount recognized in income maybe a net benefit in some
periods and a net expense in other periods. see note 2 for further information
on the fair value adjustment on claims and claim adjustment expense reserves
and reinsurance recoverables.
the following presents a
summary of the companys amortization expense for intangible assets by major
asset class:
(for the year ended december31,
in millions)
customer-related
$
$
$
marketing-related
fair value
adjustment on claims and claim adjustment expense reserves and reinsurance
recoverables
(12
)
(58
)
total
amortization expense
$
$
$
intangible asset
amortization expense is estimated to be $153 million in 2006, $145 million in
2007, $126 million in 2008, $100 million in 2009 and $86 million in 2010.
goodwill
the following table presents
the carrying amount of the companys goodwill by segment at december31,
2005 and 2004:
(at december31, in
millions)
commercial
$
1,862
$
1,893
specialty
personal
other
total
$
3,442
$
3,564
the decrease in goodwill
from december31, 2004 was primarily due to additional purchase accounting
adjustments recorded during the allocation period and certain tax adjustments
subsequently affecting goodwill.
5. segment information
the company is organized
into three reportable business segments: commercial, specialty and personal.
the accounting policies used to generate the following segment data are the
same as those described in the summary of significant accounting policies in
note 1. the amount of investments in equity method investees and total
expenditures for additions to long-lived assets other than financial
instruments were not significant.
the following tables
summarize the components of the companys revenues, operating income (loss) and
total assets by reportable business segments:
(at and for the year ended
december31, in millions)
commercial
specialty
personal
total
reportable
segments
2005 revenues
premiums
$
8,574
$
5,739
$
6,028
$
20,341
net investment income
1,944
3,158
fee income
other revenues
total operating revenues (1)
$
11,202
$
6,560
$
6,581
$
24,343
amortization and depreciation
$
1,633
$
1,184
$
1,141
$
3,958
income tax expense
operating income (1)
2,210
assets
$
73,949
$
25,147
$
12,710
$
111,806
2004 revenues
premiums
$
8,816
$
4,642
$
5,580
$
19,038
net investment income
1,728
2,657
fee income
other revenues
total
operating revenues (1)
$
11,279
$
5,177
$
6,113
$
22,569
amortization and depreciation
$
1,187
$
$
$
2,968
income tax expense (benefit)
(406
)
operating income (loss) (1)
(648
)
1,077
assets
$
70,981
$
24,067
$
11,813
$
106,861
2003 revenues
premiums
$
6,552
$
1,171
$
4,822
$
12,545
net investment income
1,324
1,868
fee income
other revenues
total operating revenues (1)
$
8,454
$
1,377
$
5,268
$
15,099
amortization
and depreciation
$
$
$
$
2,051
income tax expense
operating income (1)
1,061
1,787
assets (2)
n/a
n/a
n/a
$
64,573
(1) operating revenues exclude net realized
investment gains (losses) and revenues from discontinued operations. operating
income (loss) equals net income (loss) excluding the after-tax impact of net
realized investment gains (losses) and the after-tax impact of discontinued
operations.
(2) it is not practicable to restate assets by
segment for periods prior to the april1, 2004 merger.
business
segment reconciliations
(at and for the year ended december31,
in millions)
revenue reconciliation
earned premiums
commercial:
commercial
multi-peril
$
2,778
$
2,464
$
2,116
workers
compensation
1,591
1,550
1,129
commercial
automobile
1,730
1,699
1,323
property
1,440
1,655
1,028
general
liability
1,306
other
total
commercial
8,574
8,816
6,552
specialty:
general
liability
1,995
1,446
fidelity and
surety
1,053
workers
compensation
commercial
automobile
property
commercial
multi-peril
international
1,171
total
specialty
5,739
4,642
1,171
personal:
automobile
3,428
3,320
2,955
homeowners
and other
2,600
2,260
1,867
total
personal
6,028
5,580
4,822
total earned
premiums
20,341
19,038
12,545
net investment income
3,158
2,657
1,868
fee income
other revenues
total operating revenues for reportable
segments
24,343
22,569
15,099
interest expense and other
net realized investment gains (losses)
(39
)
total
consolidated revenues
$
24,365
$
22,544
$
15,139
income reconciliation, net of tax and
minority interest
total operating income for reportable
segments
$
2,210
$
1,077
$
1,787
interest expense and other (1)
(184
)
(182
)
(112
)
total
operating income from continuing operations
2,026
1,675
net realized investment gains (losses)
(28
)
total income
from continuing operations
2,061
1,696
discontinued operations
(439
)
total
consolidated net income
$
1,622
$
$
1,696
(1) the primary component of interest expense and
other is after-tax interest expense of $186 million, $151 million and $105
million in 2005, 2004 and 2003, respectively.
(at december31, in
millions)
asset
reconciliation
total assets
for reportable segments
$
111,806
$
106,861
$
64,573
net assets
of discontinued operations
2,041
other assets
(1)
1,381
2,344
total
consolidated assets
$
113,187
$
111,246
$
64,872
(1) the primary components of other assets in
2005 and 2004 were invested assets, prepaid pension costs and deferred taxes.
the primary component of other assets in 2003 was goodwill.
enterprise-wide
disclosures
revenues from internal
customers for the years ended december31, 2005, 2004 and 2003 were not
significant. foreign assets at december31, 2005 and 2004 also were not
significant. the company does not have revenue from transactions with a single
customer amounting to 10 percent or more of its revenues.
the following table presents
revenues of the companys operations based on location:
(for the year ended december31,
in millions)
u.s.
$
22,908
$
21,640
$
15,133
non-u.s.
1,457
total
revenues
$
24,365
$
22,544
$
15,139
6. investments
fixed
maturities
the companys investment
portfolio includes the fixed maturities, equity securities, and other
investments acquired in the merger at their fair values as of the merger date.
the fair value at acquisition became the new cost basis for these investments.
the amortized cost and fair
value of investments in fixed maturities classified as available for sale were
as follows:
amortized
cost
gross unrealized
fair
value
(at december31, 2005, in millions)
gains
losses
mortgage-backed
securities, collateralized mortgage obligations and pass-through securities
$
7,997
$
$
$
7,942
u.s.
treasury securities and obligations of u.s. government and government
agencies and authorities
3,458
3,441
obligations
of states, municipalities and political subdivisions
31,372
31,822
debt
securities issued by foreign governments
1,583
1,588
all other
corporate bonds
14,098
14,069
redeemable preferred
stock
total
$
58,616
$
$
$
58,983
(at december31, 2004, in
millions)
mortgage-backed
securities, collateralized mortgage obligations and pass-through securities
$
8,543
$
$
$
8,678
u.s.
treasury securities and obligations of u.s. government and government
agencies and authorities
3,015
3,033
obligations
of states, municipalities and political subdivisions
26,034
26,841
debt
securities issued by foreign governments
1,846
1,861
all other
corporate bonds
13,383
13,645
redeemable
preferred stock
total
$
53,017
$
1,462
$
$
54,269
the amortized cost and fair
value of fixed maturities by contractual maturity follow. actual maturities
will differ from contractual maturities because borrowers mayhave the
right to call or prepay obligations with or without call or prepayment
penalties.
(at december31, 2005, in
millions)
amortized
cost
fair
value
due in one year or less
$
4,296
$
4,290
due after 1 year through 5 years
10,729
10,757
due after 5 years through 10 years
16,221
16,281
due after 10 years
19,373
19,713
50,619
51,041
mortgage-backed securities
7,997
7,942
total
$
58,616
$
58,983
the company makes
investments in collateralized mortgage obligations (cmos) that typically have
high credit quality, offer good liquidity and are expected to provide an
advantage in yield compared to u.s. treasury securities. the companys
investment strategy is to purchase cmo tranches which offer the most favorable
return given the risks involved. one significant risk evaluated is prepayment
sensitivity. the company does invest in other types of cmo tranches if a
careful assessment indicates a favorable risk/return tradeoff. the company does
not purchase residual interests in cmos.
at december31, 2005
and 2004, the company held cmos classified as available for sale with a fair
value of $3.43 billion and $3.30 billion, respectively (excluding commercial
mortgage-backed securities of $1.16 billion and $953 million, respectively).
approximately 43% and 53% of the companys cmo holdings are guaranteed by or
fully collateralized by securities issued by gnma, fnma or fhlmc at december31,
2005 and 2004, respectively. in addition, the company held $4.83 billion and
$4.66 billion of gnma, fnma, fhlmc or fha mortgage-backed pass-through
securities classified as available for sale at december31, 2005 and 2004,
respectively. virtually all of these securities are rated aaa.
at december31, 2005
and 2004, the company had $2.67 billion and $2.60 billion, respectively, of
securities on loan as partof a tri-party lending agreement. at december31,
2005 and 2004, respectively, $119 million and $32 million of securities were
subject to dollar-roll repurchase agreements.
proceeds from sales of fixed
maturities classified as available for sale were $5.19 billion, $7.95 billion
and $8.34 billion in 2005, 2004 and 2003, respectively. gross gains of $129
million, $202 million and $282 million and gross losses of $118 million, $126
million and $147 million were realized on those sales in 2005, 2004 and 2003,
respectively.
at december31, 2005
and 2004, the companys insurance subsidiaries had $4.00 billion and $3.39
billion, respectively, of securities on deposit at financial institutions in
certain states pursuant to the respective states insurance regulatory
authorities.
the companys subsidiaries,
unionamerica and st. paul re-u.k., and the companys operations at lloyds are
required, as accredited u.s. reinsurers, to hold certain investments in trust
in the united states. these trust funds had a fair value of $374 million and $359
million at december31, 2005 and 2004, respectively. additionally,
unionamerica, st. paul re-u.k. and discover re have funds deposited with third
parties to be used as collateral to secure various liabilities on behalf of
insureds, cedants and other creditors. these funds had a fair value of $43
million and $55 million at december31, 2005 and 2004, respectively. the
company also had $85 million of other investments being used to secure
obligations under a seriesof insurance transactions, and $312 million of
other investments pledged as collateral securing outstanding letters of credit.
equity
securities
the cost and fair value of
investments in equity securities were as follows:
cost
grossunrealized
fair
value
(at december31, 2005, in
millions)
gains
losses
common stock
$
$
$
$
non-redeemable preferred stock
total
$
$
$
$
cost
grossunrealized
fair
value
(at december31, 2004, in
millions)
gains
losses
common stock
$
$
$
$
non-redeemable preferred stock
total
$
$
$
$
proceeds from sales of
equity securities were $403 million, $265 million and $254 million in 2005,
2004 and 2003, respectively, resulting in gross realized gains of $43 million,
$37 million and $22 million and gross realized losses of $9 million, $8 million
and $9 million, respectively.
real estate
the companys real estate
investments include warehouses, office buildings, land, and other commercial
real estate assets that are directly owned. the company negotiates commercial
leases with individual tenants through unrelated, licensed real estate brokers.
negotiated terms and conditions include, among others, rental rates, length of
lease period and improvements to the premises to be provided by the landlord.
proceeds from the sale of
real estate investments totaled $37 million in 2005. gross gains of $15 million
and no gross losses were realized on those sales in 2005. the company did not
sell any real estate investments in 2004 or 2003.
future minimum rental income
expected on operating leases relating to the companys real estate properties
is $93 million, $84 million, $70 million, $52 million, $37 million, and $40
million for 2006, 2007, 2008, 2009, 2010 and 2011 and thereafter, respectively.
venture
capital
the cost and fair value of
investments in venture capital, which are reported as partof other
investments in the companys consolidated balance sheet, were as follows:
cost
grossunrealized
fair
value
(at december31, 2005, in millions)
gains
losses
venture capital
$
$
$
$
(at december31, 2004, in millions)
cost
grossunrealized
fair
value
gains
losses
venture capital
$
$
$
$
variable
interest entities
the following entities are
consolidated:
municipal truststhe company owns interests
in various municipal trusts that were formed for the purpose of allowing more
flexibility to generate investment income in a manner consistent with the
companys investment objectives and tax position. as of both december31,
2005 and 2004, there were 36 such trusts, which held a combined total of $441
million and $450 million, respectively, in municipal securities, of which $84
million and $84 million, respectively, were owned by outside investors. the net
carrying value of the trusts owned by the company at december31, 2005 and
2004 was $357 million and $366 million, respectively.
venture capital entities and tax credit funds
the company has investments in venture capital entities which are held for
the purposes of generating long-term investment returns. the company also has
investments in certain tax credit funds which generate tax benefits. the
company consolidates certain venture capital investments and tax credit funds
under the provisions of the fasb revised interpretation no.46, consolidation of variable interest entities.
the combined carrying values of these investments were not significant at december31,
2005 and 2004.
the company has significant
interests in vies which are not consolidated because the company is not
considered to be the primary beneficiary. these entities are as follows:
the company has a significant variable
interest in one real estate entity. this investment has total assets of
approximately $143 million and $117 million as of december31, 2005 and
2004, respectively. the carrying value of the companys share of this
investment was approximately $31 million and $38 million at december31,
2005 and 2004, respectively, which also represented its maximum exposure to
loss. the purpose of the companys involvement in this entity is to generate
investment returns.
the company also has a significant variable
interest in camperdown uk limited, which spc sold in december2003. the
companys variable interest results from an agreement to indemnify the
purchaser in the event a specified reserve deficiency develops, a
reserve-related foreign exchange impact occurs, or a foreign tax adjustment is
imposed on a pre-sale reporting period. the maximum amount of this
indemnification obligation is $172 million. the fair value of this obligation
as of december31, 2005 and 2004 was $66 million and $44 million,
respectively. see guarantees sectionof note 17.
the company has a significant variable
interest in two private equity funds. these investments are held for the
purpose of generating long-term investment returns. the combined carrying value
of these entities was immaterial at december31, 2005 and 2004. the
company has an unfunded commitment of $12 million associated with one of these
funds. the companys exposure to loss is limited to the investment carrying
amounts reported in the consolidated balance sheet and the unfunded commitment
amount.
the company holds significant interests in
hedge fund investments that are accounted for under the equity method of
accounting and are included in other investments in the consolidated balance
sheet. hedge funds are unregistered private investment partnerships, limited
liability companies, funds or pools that mayinvest and trade in many
different markets, strategies and instruments (including securities,
non-securities and derivatives). as of december31, 2005, one hedge fund
was determined to be a significant vie. the value for all investors combined of
the hedge fund that was determined to be a significant vie was approximately
$53 million at december31, 2005. the companys share of this fund had a
carrying value of approximately $11 million at december31, 2005. the
companys involvement with this fund began in the third quarter of 2003. the
company does not have any unfunded commitments related to this fund. the
companys exposure to loss is limited to the investment carrying amounts
reported in the consolidated balance sheet.
at
december31, 2004, three hedge funds were determined to be significant
vies and had a total value for all investors combined of approximately $175
million. the companys share of these funds has a carrying value of
approximately $54 million at december31, 2004. the companys involvement
with these funds began in the third quarter of 2002. the company does not have
any unfunded commitments related to these funds. the companys exposure to loss
is limited to the investment carrying amounts reported in the consolidated
balance sheet.
there are various purposes for the companys involvement in these funds,
including but not limited to the following:
to seek capital appreciation by investing and
trading in securities including, without limitation, investments in common
stock, bonds, notes, debentures, investment contracts, partnership interests,
options and warrants;
to buy and sell u.s. and non-u.s. assets with
primary focus on a diversified pool of structured mortgage and asset-backed
securities offering attractive and relative value; and
to sell securities short primarily to exploit
arbitrage opportunities in a broad range of equity and fixed income markets.
the following securities are
not consolidated:
mandatorily redeemable preferred securities
of trusts holding solely the subordinated debentures of the companythese
securities were issued by five separate trusts that were established for the
sole purpose of issuing the securities to investors, and are fully guaranteed
by the company. the debt that the company issued to these trusts is included in
the debt sectionof liabilities on the companys consolidated balance
sheet. that debt had a carrying value of $1.03 billion and $1.04 billion at december31,
2005 and 2004, respectively.
impairments
fixed
maturities and equity securities
an investment in a fixed
maturity or equity security which is available for sale is impaired if its fair
value falls below its book value and the decline is considered to be
other-than-temporary. factors considered in determining whether a decline is
other-than-temporary include the length of time and the extent to which fair
value has been below cost, the financial condition and near-term prospects of
the issuer, and the companys ability and intent to hold the investment for a
period of time sufficient to allow for any anticipated recovery.
additionally, for certain
securitized financial assets with contractual cash flows (including
asset-backed securities), fasb emerging issues task force (eitf) 99-20, recognition of interest income and impairment on
purchased and retained beneficial interests in securitized financial assets,
requires the company to periodically update its best estimate of cash flows
over the life of the security. if management determines that the fair value of
its securitized financial asset is less than its carrying amount and there has
been a decrease in the present value of the estimated cash flows since the last
revised estimate, considering both timing and amount, then an
other-than-temporary impairment is recognized.
a fixed maturity security is
impaired if it is probable that the company will not be able to collect all
amounts due under the securitys contractual terms. equity securities are
impaired when it becomes apparent that the company will not recover its cost
over the expected holding period. further, for securities expected to be sold,
an other-than-temporary impairment charge is recognized if the company does not
expect the fair value of a security to recover prior to the expected date of
sale.
the companys process for
reviewing invested assets for impairments during any quarter includes the
following:
identification and evaluation of investments
which have possible indications of impairment;
analysis of investments with gross unrealized
investment losses that have fair values less than 80% of amortized cost during
successive quarterly periods over a rolling one-year period;
review of portfolio manager(s)
recommendations for other-than-temporary impairments based on the investees
current financial condition, liquidity, near-term recovery prospects and other
factors, as well as consideration of other investments that were not
recommended for other-than-temporary impairments;
consideration of evidential matter, including
an evaluation of factors or triggers that would or could cause individual
investments to qualify as having other-than-temporary impairments and those
that would not support other-than-temporary impairment; and
determination of the status of each analyzed
investment as other than temporary or not, with documentation of the rationale
for the decision.
real
estate investments
the carrying values of real
estate properties are reviewed for impairment when events or changes in
circumstances indicate that the carrying amount maynot be recoverable.
the review for impairment includes an estimate of the undiscounted cash flows
expected to result from the use and eventual disposition of the real estate
property. an impairment loss is recognized if the expected future undiscounted
cash flows are less than the carrying value of the real estate property.
venture
capital investments
other investments include
venture capital investments, which are generally non-publicly traded
instruments in early-stage companies and, historically, having a holding period
of four to seven years. these investments have primarily been made in the
health care, software and computer services, and networking and information
technologies infrastructures industries. the company typically is involved with
venture capital companies early in their formation, as they are developing and
determining the viability of, and market demand for, their product. generally,
the company does not expect these venture
capital companies to record
revenues in the early stages of their development, which can often take three
to four years, and does not generally expect them to become profitable for an
even longer period of time. with respect to the companys valuation of such
non-publicly traded venture capital investments, on a quarterly basis,
portfolio managers as well as an internal valuation committee review and
consider a variety of factors in determining the potential for loss impairment.
factors considered include the following:
the issuers most recent financing events;
an analysis of whether fundamental
deterioration has occurred;
whether or not the issuers progress has been
substantially less than expected;
whether or not the valuations have declined
significantly in the entitys market sector;
whether or not the internal valuation
committee believes it is probable that the issuer will need financing within
six months at a lower price than our carrying value; and
whether or not the company has the ability
and intent to hold the security for a period of time sufficient to allow for
recovery, enabling it to receive value equal to or greater than our cost.
the quarterly valuation
procedures described above are in addition to the portfolio managers ongoing
responsibility to frequently monitor developments affecting those invested
assets, paying particular attention to events that might give rise to
impairment write-downs.
non-publicly
traded investments
the companys investment
portfolio includes non-publicly traded investments, such as venture capital
investments, private equity limited partnerships, joint ventures, other limited
partnerships, and certain fixed income securities. certain venture capital
investments that are controlled by the company are consolidated in the companys
financial statements. the company uses the equity method of accounting for
joint ventures, limited partnerships and certain private equity securities.
certain other private equity investments, including venture capital
investments, are not subject to the provisions of statement of financial
accounting standards (fas) no.115, accounting
for certain investments in debt and equity securities, but are
reported at estimated fair value in accordance with fas 60, accounting and reporting by insurance enterprises.
the fair value of the venture capital investments is based on an estimate
determined by an internal valuation committee for securities for which there is
no public market. the internal valuation committee reviews such factors as
recent filings, operating results, balance sheet stability, growth, and other
business and market sector fundamental statistics in estimating fair values of
specific investments. other non-publicly traded securities are valued based on
factors such as management judgment, recent financial information and other
market data. an impairment loss is recognized if, based on the specific facts
and circumstances, it is probable that the company will not be able to recover
all of the cost of an individual holding.
unrealized
investment losses
the following tables
summarize, for all investment securities in an unrealized loss position at december31,
2005 and 2004, the aggregate fair value and gross unrealized loss by length of
time those securities have been continuously in an unrealized loss position.
less than 12 months
12 months or
longer
total
(at december31, 2005, in millions)
fair
value
gross
unrealized
losses
fair
value
gross
unrealized
losses
fair
value
gross
unrealized
losses
fixed maturities
mortgage-backed
securities, collateralized mortgage obligations and pass through securities
$
4,046
$
$
1,673
$
$
5,719
$
u.s.
treasury securities and obligations of u.s. government and government
agencies and authorities
2,395
2,971
obligations
of states, municipalities and political subdivisions
9,524
2,331
11,855
debt
securities issued by foreign governments
all other
corporate bonds
4,971
3,652
8,623
redeemable
preferred stock
total fixed
maturities
21,488
8,438
29,926
equity
securities
common stock
nonredeemable
preferred stock
total equity
securities
venture
capital
total
$
21,553
$
$
8,486
$
$
30,039
$
less than 12 months
12 months or
longer
total
(at december31, 2004, in millions)
fair
value
gross
unrealized
losses
fair
value
gross
unrealized
losses
fair
value
gross
unrealized
losses
fixed maturities
mortgage-backed
securities, collateralized mortgage obligations and pass through securities
$
3,256
$
$
$
$
3,286
$
u.s.
treasury securities and obligations of u.s. government and government
agencies and authorities
1,743
1,747
obligations
of states, municipalities and political subdivisions
5,708
5,772
debt
securities issued by foreign governments
all other
corporate bonds
6,190
6,437
redeemable
preferred stock
total fixed
maturities
17,631
17,994
equity
securities
common stock
nonredeemable
preferred stock
total equity
securities
venture
capital
total
$
17,798
$
$
$
$
18,179
$
impairment charges included
in net realized investment gains (losses) were as follows:
(for the year ended december31,
in millions)
fixed maturities
$
$
$
equity securities
venture capital
real estate and other
total
$
$
$
mortgage
loans
aggregate annual maturities
on mortgage loans are $42 million, $5 million, $9 million, $2 million, and $87
million for 2006, 2007, 2008, 2009 and 2010 and thereafter, respectively.
underperforming mortgage
loans, which include delinquent loans, loans in the process of foreclosure and
loans modified at interest rates below market, were $0 and $4 million at december31,
2005 and 2004, respectively.
concentrations
and credit quality
at december31, 2005
and 2004, the company had concentrations of credit risk in tax-exempt
investments of the state of texas of $3.27 billion and $2.30 billion,
respectively, of the state of illinois of $1.84 billion and $1.50 billion,
respectively, and of the state of new york of $1.67 billion and $1.44 billion,
respectively.
included in fixed maturities
are below investment grade assets totaling $1.75 billion and $1.78 billion at december31,
2005 and 2004, respectively. the company defines its below investment grade
assets as those securities rated below investment grade by external rating
agencies, or the equivalent by the companys investment advisors when a public
rating does not exist. such assets include publicly traded below investment
grade bonds and certain other privately issued bonds that are classified as
below investment grade loans.
the company monitors
creditworthiness of counterparties to financial instruments by using controls
that include credit approvals, limits and other monitoring procedures.
net
investment income
(for the year ended december31,
in millions)
gross
investment income
fixed
maturities
$
2,530
$
2,128
$
1,527
equity
securities
short-term
securities
mortgage
loans and real estate
other
investments
gross
investment income
3,238
2,768
1,924
investment
expenses
net
investment income
$
3,165
$
2,663
$
1,869
net realized
and unrealized investment gains (losses)
net realized investment
gains (losses) for the periods were as follows:
(for the year ended december31,
in millions)
net
realized investment gains (losses)
fixed
maturities
$
$
$
equity
securities
venture
capital and other
(17
)
(113
)
(38
)
net realized
investment gains (losses)
$
$
(39
)
$
changes in net unrealized
gains (losses) on investment securities that are included as a separate
component of accumulated other changes in equity from nonowner sources were as
follows:
(at and for the year ended december31,
in millions)
change
in net unrealized investment gains (losses)
fixed
maturities
$
(885
)
$
(315
)
$
equity
securities
(31
)
venture
capital and other
(852
)
(290
)
related
taxes
(311
)
(98
)
minority
interest
(1
)
change in
net unrealized gains (losses) on investment securities
(541
)
(192
)
balance,
beginning of year
1,060
balance, end
of year
$
$
$
1,060
7. earnings per share
earnings per share (eps) was
computed in accordance with statement of financial accounting standards no.128,
earnings per share (fas 128).
basic eps was computed by dividing income available to common shareholders by
the weighted average number of common shares outstanding during the period. the
computation of diluted eps reflected the effect of potentially dilutive
securities.
the weighted average number
of common shares outstanding applicable to basic and diluted eps for all
periods prior to april1, 2004 were restated to reflect the exchange of
each share of tpc common stock for 0.4334 shares of the companys common stock.
in 2004, the company
implemented the provisions of fasb eitf 04-8, the
effect of contingently convertible debt on diluted earnings per share,
which provided new guidance on the dilutive effect of contingently convertible
debt instruments. the company has one debt instrument outstanding to which the
new guidance applied  its $893 million, 4.50% convertible junior subordinated
notes convertible into 16.7 million shares of the companys common stock.
income from continuing operations per diluted share for the year ended december31,
2004 excluded the weighted average effects of these notes as the impact would
have been anti-dilutive. for the year ended december31, 2003, the
application of the new guidance resulted in the restatement of diluted income
from continuing operations per share from the previously reported $3.88 to
$3.80.
the following is a
reconciliation of the income and share data used in the basic and diluted
earnings per share computations:
(for the year ended december31,
in millions, except per share amounts)
basic
income from
continuing operations, as reported
$
2,061
$
$
1,696
preferred
stock dividends, net of taxes
(6
)
(6
)
income from
continuing operations available to common shareholders  basic
$
2,055
$
$
1,696
diluted
income from
continuing operations available to common shareholders
$
2,055
$
$
1,696
effect of
dilutive securities:
equity unit
stock purchase contracts
convertible
preferred stock
zero coupon
convertible notes
convertible
junior subordinated notes
income from
continuing operations available to common shareholders  diluted
$
2,100
$
$
1,722
common
shares
basic
weighted
average shares outstanding
676.3
608.3
434.3
diluted
weighted
average shares outstanding
676.3
608.3
434.3
weighted
average effects of dilutive securities:
stock
options and other incentive plans
3.7
2.9
2.3
equity unit
stock purchase contracts
9.5
11.5
convertible
preferred stock
4.2
3.8
zero coupon
convertible notes
2.4
1.8
convertible
junior subordinated notes
16.7
16.7
total
712.8
628.3
453.3
income
from continuing operations per common share
basic
$
3.04
$
1.42
$
3.91
diluted
$
2.95
$
1.40
$
3.80
8. reinsurance
the companys consolidated
financial statements reflect the effects of assumed and ceded reinsurance
transactions. assumed reinsurance refers to the acceptance of certain insurance
risks that other insurance companies have underwritten. ceded reinsurance
involves transferring certain insurance risks (along with the related written
and earned premiums) the company has underwritten to other insurance companies
who agree to share these risks. the primary purpose of ceded reinsurance is to
protect the company from potential losses in excess of the amount it is
prepared to accept. reinsurance is placed on both a quota-share and excess of
loss basis. ceded reinsurance arrangements do not discharge the company as the
primary insurer, except for cases involving a novation.
the company evaluates and
monitors the financial condition of its reinsurers under voluntary reinsurance
arrangements to minimize its exposure to significant losses from reinsurer
insolvencies. in addition, in the ordinary course of business, the company maybecome
involved in coverage disputes with its reinsurers. some of these disputes could
result in lawsuits and arbitrations brought by or against the reinsurers to
determine the companys rights and obligations under the various reinsurance
agreements. the company employs dedicated specialists and strategies to manage
reinsurance collections and disputes.
the company is also required
to participate in various involuntary reinsurance arrangements through assumed
reinsurance, principally with regard to residual market mechanisms in workers
compensation. the company provides services for several of these involuntary
arrangements (mandatory pools and associations) under which it writes such
residual market business directly, then cedes 100% of this business to the
mandatory pool. such servicing arrangements are arranged to protect the company
from any credit risk, as any ceded balances are jointly backed by all the pool
members.
the company reports its
reinsurance recoverables net of an allowance for estimated uncollectible
reinsurance recoverables. the allowance is based upon the companys ongoing
review of amounts outstanding, length of collection periods, changes in
reinsurer credit standing, disputes, applicable coverage defenses and other
relevant factors. accordingly, the establishment of reinsurance recoverables
and the related allowance for uncollectible reinsurance recoverables is an
inherently uncertain process involving estimates. amounts deemed to be
uncollectible, including amounts due from known insolvent reinsurers, are
written off against the allowance for estimated uncollectible reinsurance
recoverables. any subsequent collections of amounts previously written off are
reported as partof underwriting results.
the allowance for estimated
uncollectible reinsurance recoverables was $804 million and $751 million at december31,
2005 and december31, 2004, respectively.
the company assumed 100% of
the workers compensation premiums previously written by the accident
department of its former affiliate, the travelers insurance company (tic).
certain of the assumed
reinsurance contracts that the company has entered into with non-affiliated
companies on an excess of loss basis do not transfer insurance risk. these contracts
are accounted for using deposit accounting and are included in other
liabilities in the consolidated balance sheet and totaled $346 million and $405
million at december31, 2005 and 2004, respectively.
the following is a summary
of reinsurance financial data reflected in the consolidated statement of
income:
(for the year ended december31,
in millions)
written
premiums
direct
$
22,741
$
21,413
$
14,977
assumed
ceded
(3,350
)
(3,247
)
(2,169
)
total net
written premiums
$
20,386
$
19,011
$
13,201
earned
premiums
direct
$
22,793
$
21,551
$
14,324
assumed
1,079
1,007
ceded
(3,531
)
(3,520
)
(2,277
)
total net
earned premiums
$
20,341
$
19,038
$
12,545
percentage
of assumed earned premiums to net earned premiums
5.3
%
5.3
%
4.0
%
ceded
claims and claim adjustment expenses incurred
$
3,601
$
3,175
$
2,333
reinsurance recoverables,
net of valuation allowance, include amounts recoverable on unpaid and paid
claims and were as follows:
(at december31, in
millions)
mandatory
pools and associations
$
2,211
$
2,497
structured
settlements
3,990
3,941
other
13,373
12,616
total
reinsurance recoverables
$
19,574
$
19,054
in 2004, the company entered
into commutation agreements with a major reinsurer, resulting in a charge of
$153 million for amounts received less than the reinsurance recoverable
balances of approximately $1.26 billion. in connection with the commutation,
the company also entered into a new reinsurance agreement effective april1,
2004, that provides $300 million aggregate coverage for the 2000 accident year
exposures written by spc. because the new agreement is for events occurring
prior to the effective date of the agreement, the resulting $59 million gain
was deferred and will be recognized in earnings as amounts are recovered from
the reinsurer. under the terms of these agreements, the company received net
cash of approximately $867 million in 2004.
9. insurance claims reserves
claims and claim adjustment
expense reserves were as follows:
(at december31, in
millions)
property-casualty
$
61,007
$
58,984
accident and
health
total
$
61,090
$
59,070
the table below is a
reconciliation of beginning and ending property casualty reserve balances for
claims and claim adjustment expenses.
(at and for the year ended december31,
in millions)
claims and
claim adjustment expense reserves at beginning of year
$
58,984
$
34,474
$
33,628
less
reinsurance recoverables on unpaid losses
17,538
10,419
10,360
net balance
at beginning of year
41,446
24,055
23,268
provision
for claims and claim adjustment expenses for claims arising in the current
year
14,450
12,855
8,554
estimated
claims and claim adjustment expenses for claims arising in prior years
2,399
acquisition(1)
13,653
total
increases
14,710
28,907
8,944
claims and
claim adjustment expense payments for claims arising in:
current year
4,227
3,998
2,987
prior years
8,871
7,553
5,170
total
payments
13,098
11,551
8,157
unrealized
foreign exchange (gain) loss
(163
)
net balance
at end of year
42,895
41,446
24,055
plus
reinsurance recoverables on unpaid losses(1)
18,112
17,538
10,419
claims and
claim adjustment expense reserves at end of year
$
61,007
$
58,984
$
34,474
(1) spc net claims and claim adjustment expense
reserves at april1, 2004. spc gross reserves at that date were $19.50
billion. spc reinsurance recoverables on unpaid losses at april1, 2004
were $5.85 billion.
gross claims and claim
adjustment expense reserves at december31, 2005 increased $2.02 billion
over year-end 2004 as a result of the impact of the significant catastrophe
losses incurred in the third and fourth quarters of 2005, and an increase to
asbestos reserves pursuant to the completion of the companys annual review of
asbestos reserves in the fourth quarter, both of which are described in more
detail in the discussion that follows. those increases in reserves were partially
offset by claim and claim expense payments from runoff operations and other net
favorable prior year reserve development in the companys commercial and
personal segments.
gross claims and claim
adjustment expense reserves at december31, 2004 increased by $24.51
billion over year-end 2003, primarily as a result of the merger with spc and
reserve charges recorded subsequent to the merger. of the increase in 2004,
$19.50 billion resulted from the addition of the acquired operations, and $2.40
billion was due to estimated claims and claim adjustment expenses for claims
arising in prior years, which is described in more detail in the discussion
that follows.
the fair value adjustments
to the acquired claims and claim adjustment expense reserves and reinsurance
recoverables as of april1, 2004, the merger date, are reported as
intangible assets and are being amortized over the expected payout period of
the acquired reserves. see note 2.
prior year
reserve development
in 2005, estimated claims
and claim adjustment expenses for claims arising in prior years totaled a net
$260 million, including $325 million of net unfavorable prior year reserve
development impacting the companys results of operations which excludes $59
million of accretion of discount. in 2005, estimated claims and claim
adjustment expenses for claims arising in prior years included $30 million of
net favorable loss development on commercial loss sensitive policies in various
lines; however, since the business to which it relates was subject to premium
adjustments, there was no impact on results of operations.
in the commercial segment,
net unfavorable prior year reserve development in 2005 was $694 million,
including $830 million to strengthen asbestos reserves and $30 million to
strengthen environmental reserves, which are discussed in more detail in the
following asbestos and environmental reserves section. the remaining net
favorable prior year reserve development of $166 million was driven by lower
than expected frequency and severity for both casualty and property-related
lines of business in the commercial segment, partially offset by reserve
strengthening for assumed reinsurance, which is in runoff.
the specialty segment
recorded net favorable prior year reserve development of $9 million in 2005,
driven by lower than expected severity for property-related exposures.
in the personal segment, net
favorable prior year reserve development in 2005 totaled $360 million, driven
by lower than expected frequency and severity of losses in the automobile line
of business, as well as a decline in the frequency of non-catastrophe
homeowners losses.
in 2004, estimated claims
and claim adjustment expenses for claims arising in prior years totaled a net
$2.40 billion, including $2.39 billion of net unfavorable prior year reserve
development impacting the companys results of operations, excluding $75
million of accretion of discount. net unfavorable prior year reserve
development included $928 million to strengthen asbestos reserves, reserve
adjustments related to the merger of $500 million for construction and $300
million for surety, $290 million to strengthen environmental reserves, $252
million related to a specific construction contractor, $113 million related to
the commutation of agreements with a major reinsurer, and other net reserving
actions.
primarily all of the
asbestos and environmental charges in 2004 were recorded in the commercial
segment and are discussed in more detail in the following asbestos and
environmental reserves section. also included in net unfavorable prior year
reserve development in the commercial segment in 2004 was $38 million related
to the commutation of agreements with a major reinsurer along with a strengthening
of gulf reserves, which was more than offset by other favorable prior year
reserve development in core commercial operations due to lower than expected
frequency of non-catastrophe related losses.
the specialty segment
recorded prior year reserve development of $1.43 billion in 2004, which
included the charges to strengthen construction and surety reserves referred to
previously, as well as the $252 million charge related to a specific
construction contractor and $75 million related to the commutation of
agreements with a major reinsurer. results in 2004 also reflected $150 million
of net unfavorable prior year reserve development recorded in tpcs
construction operation prior to the merger, other reserve increases, and a
charge to increase the allowance for estimated amounts due from a co-surety on
a specific construction contractor claim.
in the personal segment, net
favorable prior year reserve development in 2004 was $378 million, driven by
lower than expected frequency of non-catastrophe homeowners losses, as well as
a reduction in the frequency and severity of losses in the automobile line of
business.
in 2003, net unfavorable
prior year reserve development included in estimated claims and claim
adjustment expenses totaled $390 million. that amount included $549 million of
net unfavorable development impacting the companys results of operations that
primarily resulted from $521 million of reserve strengthening at gulf insurance
company, a subsidiary that wrote specialty insurance prior to being placed in
runoff in 2004. the net 2003 total also included unfavorable development
related to american equity, an operation that was placed in run-off in the
second quarter of 2002, and environmental claims.
those charges were partially offset by net favorable
development in other commercial businesses, principally property coverages, in
which the company experienced lower non-catastrophe-related claim frequency. in
2003, estimated claims and claim adjustment expenses for claims arising in
prior years included $42 million of net favorable loss development on
commercial loss sensitive policies in various lines; however, since the
business to which it relates was subject to premium adjustments, there was no
impact on results of operations.
in addition, personal recorded $162 million in net
favorable prior year reserve development in 2003 principally due to lower than
expected non-catastrophe claim frequency in both homeowners and non-bodily
injury automobile businesses, and a $50 million reduction in reserves held
related to the terrorist attack on september 11, 2001.
for each of the years ended december 31, 2005, 2004
and 2003, changes in allocations between accident years of loss adjustment
expenses, pursuant to regulatory reporting requirements, are included in claims
and claim adjustment expenses for claims arising in prior years and did not
impact results of operations.
asbestos and environmental reserves
at december 31, 2005 and 2004, the companys claims
and claim adjustment expense reserves included $4.79 billion and $4.57 billion,
respectively, for asbestos and environmental-related claims, net of
reinsurance.
it is difficult to estimate the reserves for asbestos
and environmental-related claims due to the vagaries of court coverage
decisions, plaintiffs expanded theories of liability, the risks inherent in
complex litigation and other uncertainties, including without limitation, those
which are set forth below.
asbestos reserves.
because each policyholder presents different liability and coverage issues, the
company generally reviews the asbestos exposure presented by each policyholder
on a policyholder-by-policyholder basis. in the course of this review, the
company considers, among other factors: available insurance coverage, including
the role of any umbrella or excess insurance the company has issued to the
policyholder; limits and deductibles; an analysis of each policyholders
potential liability; the jurisdictions involved; past and anticipated future
claim activity and loss development on pending claims; past settlement values
of similar claims; allocated claim adjustment expense; potential role of other
insurance; the role, if any, of non-asbestos claims or potential non-asbestos
claims in any resolution process; and applicable coverage defenses or
determinations, if any, including the determination as to whether or not an
asbestos claim is a products/completed operation claim subject to an aggregate
limit and the available coverage, if any, for that claim. when an estimate of
the gross ultimate exposure for indemnity and related claim adjustment expense
is determined for a policyholder, the company calculates, by each policy year,
a ceded reinsurance projection based on any applicable facultative and treaty
reinsurance, as well as past ceded experience and reinsurance collections.
conventional actuarial methods are not utilized to establish asbestos reserves.
the companys evaluations have not resulted in any data from which a meaningful
average asbestos defense or indemnity payment may be determined.
with respect to asbestos exposures, the company also
compares its historical gross and net loss and expense paid experience,
year-by-year, to assess any emerging trends, fluctuations, or characteristics
suggested by the aggregate paid activity. net asbestos losses and expenses paid
in 2005 were $399 million, compared with $301 million in 2004. this increase
was primarily driven by inclusion of the spc business for the full year in 2005
and substantial reinsurance recoveries in the third quarter of 2004.
approximately 42% in 2005 and 22% in 2004 of total net paid losses relate to
policyholders with whom the company previously entered into settlement
agreements limiting the companys liability. the lower percentage experienced
in 2004 reflected substantial reinsurance billings during the year. in 2005,
gross payments associated with policyholders with settlement agreements totaled
$203 million, compared with $199 million in 2004.
the $830 million and $928 million asbestos reserve
provisions in 2005 and 2004, respectively, were recorded pursuant to the
completion of the companys annual ground-up asbestos liability review in the
fourth quarter, which included an analysis of exposure and claim payment patterns
by policyholder category, as well as recent settlements, policyholder
bankruptcies,
judicial rulings and legislative actions. the asbestos
provision in 2005 resulted, in part, from higher than expected defense costs
due to increased trial activity for seriously impaired plaintiffs and prolonged
litigation before cases are settled or dismissed. the 2005 provision also
considered the january 2006 court decision voiding, on procedural grounds, the
previously rendered favorable arbitration decision in the ongoing acands
litigation (described in more detail in note 17). the asbestos provision
recorded in 2004 primarily resulted from an increase in litigation costs and
activity surrounding peripheral defendants.
at december 31, 2005, asbestos reserves, net of
reinsurance, were $4.36 billion, compared with $3.93 billion as of december 31,
2004. the company acquired $311 million of net asbestos reserves in the merger
with spc in 2004.
environmental reserves.
in establishing environmental reserves, the company evaluates the exposure
presented by each policyholder and the anticipated cost of resolution, if any.
in the course of this analysis, the company considers the probable liability,
available coverage, relevant judicial interpretations and historical value of
similar exposures. in addition, the company considers the many variables
presented, such as the nature of the alleged activities of the policyholder at
each site; the allegations of environmental harm at each site; the number of
sites; the total number of potentially responsible parties at each site; the
nature of environmental harm and the corresponding remedy at each site; the
nature of government enforcement activities at each site; the ownership and
general use of each site; the overall nature of the insurance relationship
between the company and the policyholder, including the role of any umbrella or
excess insurance the company has issued to the policyholder; the involvement of
other insurers; the potential for other available coverage, including the
number of years of coverage; the role, if any, of non-environmental claims or
potential non-environmental claims, in any resolution process; and the
applicable law in each jurisdiction. conventional actuarial techniques are not
used to estimate these reserves. in 2005, the company recorded a pretax charge
of $30 million, net of reinsurance, primarily for declaratory judgment costs.
in 2004, the company recorded a pretax charge of $290 million, net of
reinsurance, to increase environmental reserves due to revised estimates of
costs related to recent settlement initiatives. net environmental losses paid
were $246 million, $152 million and $155 million for the years ended december
31, 2005, 2004 and 2003, respectively.
as a result of the processes and procedures described
above, management believes that the reserves carried for asbestos and
environmental claims at december 31, 2005 are appropriately established based
upon known facts, current law and managements judgment. however, the
uncertainties surrounding the final resolution of these claims continue, and it
is presently not possible to determine the ultimate exposure for asbestos and
environmental claims and related litigation. as a result, these reserves are
subject to revision as new information becomes available and as claims develop.
the continuing uncertainties include, without limitation, the risks and lack of
predictability inherent in complex litigation, any impact from the bankruptcy protection
sought by various asbestos producers and other asbestos defendants, a further
increase or decrease in asbestos and environmental claims which cannot now be
anticipated, the role of any umbrella or excess policies the company has
issued, the resolution or adjudication of some disputes pertaining to the
amount of available coverage for asbestos claims in a manner inconsistent with
the companys previous assessment of these claims, the number and outcome of
direct actions against the company and future developments pertaining to the
companys ability to recover reinsurance for asbestos and environmental claims.
in addition, the companys asbestos-related loss and loss expense experience
has been impacted by the exhaustion or unavailability due to insolvency of
other insurance potentially available to policyholders along with the
insolvency or bankruptcy of other defendants. it is also not possible to
predict changes in the legal and legislative environment and their impact on
the future development of asbestos and environmental claims. this development
will be affected by future court decisions and interpretations, as well as
changes in applicable legislation. it is also difficult to predict the ultimate
outcome of large coverage disputes until settlement negotiations near
completion and significant legal questions are resolved or, failing settlement,
until the dispute is adjudicated. this is particularly the case with
policyholders in bankruptcy where negotiations often involve a large number of
claimants and other parties and require court approval to be effective. as part
of its continuing analysis of asbestos reserves, which includes an annual
ground-up review of asbestos policyholders, the company continues to study the
implications of these and other developments.
asbestos and environmental reserves.
because of the uncertainties set forth above, additional liabilities may arise
for amounts in excess of the current asbestos and environmental reserves. in
addition, the companys estimate of ultimate claims and claim adjustment
expenses may change. these additional liabilities or increases in estimates, or
a range of either, cannot now be reasonably estimated and could result in
income statement charges that could be material to the companys results of operations
and financial condition in future periods.
10. debt
debt and convertible notes payable outstanding were as
follows:
(at december 31, in millions)
short-term:
commercial paper
$
$
6.75% senior notes due november 15, 2006
medium-term notes maturing in following year
7.875% senior notes due april 15, 2005
7.125% senior notes due june 1, 2005
total short-term
debt
long-term:
medium-term notes with various maturities through
6.75% senior notes due november 15, 2006
5.75% senior notes due march 15, 2007
5.01%* senior notes due august 16, 2007
5.25%* senior notes due august 16, 2007
3.75% senior notes due march 15, 2008
zero coupon convertible notes due 2009
8.125% senior notes due april 15, 2010
7.81% private placement notes due on various dates
through 2011
5.00% senior notes due march 15, 2013
5.50% senior notes due december 1, 2015
7.75% senior notes due april 15, 2026
7.625% subordinated debentures due december 15, 2027
8.47% subordinated debentures due january 10, 2027
4.50% convertible junior subordinated notes payable
due april 15, 2032
6.375% senior notes due march 15, 2033
8.50% subordinated debentures due december 15, 2045
8.312% subordinated debentures due july 1, 2046
7.60% subordinated debentures due october 15, 2050
total long-term
debt
5,393
5,198
total debt
principal
5,703
6,113
unamortized fair value adjustment
unamortized debt issuance costs
(38
)
(39
)
total debt
$
5,850
$
6,313
* these senior notes had
an interest rate of 5.25% at december 31, 2004. the interest rate was reset to
5.01% in may 2005 pursuant to the remarketing of these notes as described
below.
on april 1, 2004, the st. paul travelers companies,
inc. fully and unconditionally guaranteed the payment of all principal,
premiums, if any, and interest on certain debt obligations of its subsidiaries
tpc and travelers insurance group holdings inc. (tighi). the guarantees pertain
to the $150 million 6.75% notes due 2006, the $400 million 3.75% notes due
2008, the $500 million 5.00% notes due 2013, the $200 million 7.75% notes due
2026, the $893 million 4.5% convertible notes due 2032 and the $500 million
6.375% notes due 2033.
the companys consolidated balance sheet includes the
debt instruments acquired in the merger, which were recorded at fair value as
of the acquisition date. the resulting fair value adjustment is being amortized
over the remaining life of the respective debt instruments using the
effective-interest method. the amortization of the fair value adjustment
reduced interest expense by $54 million and $55 million for the years ended
december 31, 2005 and 2004, respectively.
the following table presents the unamortized fair
value adjustment and the related effective interest rate on the spc debt
instruments acquired in the merger:
unamortized fair value
purchase adjustment at
effective
interestrate
to maturity
(in millions)
issuerate
maturity date
december 31, 2005
december 31, 2004
senior notes
7.875
%
apr.2005
$
$
1.645
%
7.125
%
jun. 2005
1.881
%
5.750
%
mar.2007
2.625
%
5.250
%
aug.2007
1.389
%
8.125
%
apr. 2010
4.257
%
medium-term notes
6.4-7.4
%
through2010
3.310
%
subordinated debentures
7.625
%
dec. 2027
6.147
%
8.470
%
jan. 2027
7.660
%
8.500
%
dec. 2045
6.362
%
8.312
%
jul. 2046
6.362
%
7.600
%
oct. 2050
7.057
%
zero coupon convertible notes
4.500
%
mar. 2009
4.175
%
total
$
$
description of debt
commercial paperthe
company maintains an $800 million commercial paper program with $1 billion of
back-up liquidity, consisting entirely of bank credit agreements. interest
rates on commercial paper issued in 2005 ranged from 2.3% to 4.4%, and in 2004
ranged from 1.1% to 2.8%.
medium-term notesthe
medium-term notes outstanding at december 31, 2005 bear interest rates ranging
from 6.38% to 7.42%, with a weighted average rate of 6.76%. maturity dates on
remaining notes outstanding at december 31, 2005 range from 2006 to 2010.
during 2005 and 2004, medium-term notes having a par value of $99 million and
$59 million, respectively, matured.
5.01% senior notes
in july 2002, concurrent with the issuance of 17.8 million of spc common shares
in a public offering, spc issued 8.9 million equity units, each having a stated
amount of $50, for gross consideration of $442 million. each equity unit
initially consisted of a forward purchase contract for the companys common
stock, which matured in august 2005, and an unsecured $50 senior note of the
company (maturing in 2007). total annual distributions on the equity units were
at the rate of 9.00%, consisting of interest on the note at a rate of 5.25% and
fee payments under the forward contract of 3.75%. holders of the equity units
had the opportunity to participate in a required remarketing of the senior note
component. the initial remarketing date was may 11, 2005. on that date, the
notes were successfully remarketed, and the interest rate on the notes was
reset to 5.01%, from 5.25%, effective may 16, 2005. the remarketed notes mature
on august 16, 2007. the forward purchase contract required the investor to
purchase, for $50, a variable number of shares of the companys common stock on
the settlement date of august 16, 2005. the number of shares purchased was
determined based on a formula that considered the average closing price of the
companys common stock on each of 20 consecutive trading days ending on the third
trading day immediately preceding the settlement date, in relation to the
$24.20 per share price of common stock at the time of the offering. on the
august 16, 2005 settlement date, the company issued 15.2 million common shares
and received total proceeds of $442 million.
5.50% senior notesin
november 2005, the company issued $400 million of 5.50% senior notes due
december 1, 2015. the notes pay interest semi-annually on june 1 and december 1
of each year, beginning june 1, 2006, are senior unsecured obligations and rank
equally with all of the companys other senior unsecured indebtedness. the
company may redeem some or all of the notes prior to maturity at a redemption
price equal to the greater of: 100% of the principal amount of senior notes to
be redeemed; or the sum of the present values of the remaining scheduled
payments of principal and interest on the senior notes to be redeemed
(exclusive of interest accrued to the date of redemption) discounted to the
date of redemption on a semiannual basis at the then current treasury rate plus
20 basis points. the majority of the proceeds from the issuance of the 5.50%
senior notes was used to pay down the companys commercial paper outstanding,
with the remainder used for general corporate purposes.
zero coupon convertible notesthe
zero coupon convertible notes mature in 2009, but are redeemable at the option
of the company for an amount equal to the original issue price plus accreted
original issue discount. each note is convertible at the option of the holder
at any time on or prior to maturity, unless previously redeemed by the company,
into common stock of the company at a conversion rate of 16.6433 shares for
each $1,000 principal amount of notes.
3.75%, 5.00%, 6.375% senior noteson
march 11, 2003, the company issued $1.40 billion of senior notes comprising
$400 million of 3.75% senior notes due march 15, 2008, $500 million of 5.00%
senior notes due march 15, 2013 and $500 million of 6.375% senior notes due
march 15, 2033. the notes pay interest semi-annually on march 15 and september
15 of each year, beginning september 15, 2003, are senior unsecured obligations
and rank equally with all of the companys other senior unsecured indebtedness.
the company may redeem some or all of the notes prior to maturity by paying a make-whole
premium based on u.s. treasury rates. the net proceeds from the sale of these
notes were contributed to tighi, so that tighi could prepay and refinance $500
million of 3.60% indebtedness to citigroup and to redeem $900 million aggregate
principal amount of tighis 8.00% and 8.08% junior subordinated debt securities
held by subsidiary trusts. these trusts, in turn, used these funds to redeem
$900 million of preferred capital securities on april 9, 2003.
these senior notes were sold to qualified
institutional buyers as defined under rule 144a under the securities act of
1933 (the securities act) and outside the united states in reliance on
regulation s under the securities act. accordingly, the notes (the restricted
notes) were not registered under the securities act or any state securities
laws and could not be transferred or resold except pursuant to certain
exemptions. as part of this offering, the company agreed to file a registration
statement under the securities act to permit the exchange of the notes for
registered notes (the exchange notes) having terms identical to those of the
senior notes described above (exchange offer). on april 14, 2003, the company
initiated the exchange offer pursuant to a form s-4 that was filed with the
securities and exchange commission. accordingly, each series of exchange notes
has been registered under the securities act, and the transfer restrictions and
registration rights relating to the restricted notes do not apply to the
exchange notes. as of may 13, 2003 (the expiration date of the exchange offer),
99.8%, 99.4% and 100% of the companys 5, 10, and 30-year restricted notes,
respectively, were exchanged for exchange notes.
4.50% convertible junior
subordinated notesin march 2002, the company issued $893
million aggregate principal amount of 4.5% convertible junior subordinated
notes, which will mature on april 15, 2032, unless earlier redeemed,
repurchased or converted. interest is payable quarterly in arrears. the company
has the option to defer interest payments on the notes for a period not
exceeding 20 consecutive interest periods nor beyond the maturity of the notes.
during a deferral period, the amount of interest due to holders of the notes
will continue to accumulate, and such deferred interest payments will
themselves accrue interest. deferral of any interest can create certain
restrictions for the company. unless previously redeemed or repurchased, the
notes are convertible into shares of common stock at the option of the holders
at any time after march 27, 2003 and prior to april 15, 2032 if at any time (1)
the average of the daily closing prices of common stock for the 20 consecutive
trading days immediately prior to the conversion date is at least 20% above the
then applicable conversion price on the conversion date, (2) the notes have
been called for redemption, (3) specified corporate transactions have occurred,
or (4) specified credit rating events with respect to the notes have occurred.
the notes will be convertible into shares of common stock at a conversion rate
of 0.4684 shares of common stock for each $25.00 principal amount of notes
(equivalent to an initial conversion price of $53.37 per share of common
stock), subject to adjustment in certain events. on or after april 18, 2007,
the notes may be redeemed at the companys option. the company is not required
to make mandatory redemption or sinking fund payments with respect to the
notes. the notes are general unsecured obligations and are subordinated in
right of payment to all existing and future senior indebtedness. the notes are
also effectively subordinated to all existing and future indebtedness and other
liabilities of any of the companys current or future subsidiaries.
maturitiesthe
amount of debt obligations, other than commercial paper, that become due in
each of the next five years is as follows: 2006, $210 million; 2007, $1.02
billion; 2008, $552 million; 2009, $143 million; and 2010, $273 million.
line of credit agreements
the company maintains an $800 million commercial paper
program with back-up liquidity consisting of a bank credit agreement. in june
2005, the company entered into a $1.0 billion, five-year revolving credit
agreement with a syndicate of financial institutions. the new credit agreement
replaced and consolidated the companys three prior bank credit agreements that
had collectively provided the company access to $1.0 billion of bank credit
lines. pursuant to covenants in the new credit agreement, the company must
maintain an excess of consolidated net worth over goodwill and other intangible
assets of not less than $10 billion at all times. the company must also
maintain a ratio of total consolidated debt to the sum of total consolidated
debt plus consolidated net worth of not greater than 0.40 to 1.00. in addition,
the credit agreement contains other customary restrictive covenants as well as
certain customary events of default, including with respect to a change in
control. at december 31, 2005, the company was in compliance with these
covenants and all other covenants related to its respective debt instruments
outstanding. pursuant to the terms of the credit agreement, the company has an option
to increase the credit available under the facility, no more than once a year,
up to a maximum facility amount of $1.5 billion, subject to the satisfaction of
a ratings requirement and certain other conditions. there was no amount
outstanding under the credit agreement as of december 31, 2005.
shelf registration
in december 2005, the company filed with the
securities and exchange commission a shelf registration statement for the
potential offering and sale of securities. the company may offer these
securities from time to time at prices and on other terms to be determined at
the time of offering.
11. income taxes
(for the year ended december 31, in millions)
composition
of income tax expense (benefit) included in consolidated statement of income
current expense
(benefit) on continuing operations:
federal
$
(18
)
$
$
(7
)
foreign
state
total current
tax expense (benefit) on continuing operations
(2
)
deferred expense
(benefit) on continuing operations:
federal
(280
)
foreign
state
total deferred
tax expense (benefit) on continuing operations
(245
)
tax expense on
income from continuing operations before minority interest
tax expense
included in discontinued operations
total income tax
expense included in consolidated statement of income
$
1,461
$
$
composition
of income tax expense (benefit) included in common shareholders equity
expense
(benefit) relating to stock-based compensation, the change in unrealized
appreciation on investments, unrealized loss on foreign exchange and
unrealized loss on derivatives, and other comprehensive income
$
(333
)
$
(117
)
$
total income tax
expense included in consolidated financial statements
$
1,128
$
$
effective
tax rate
income from
continuing operations before federal, foreign and state income taxes and
minority interest
$
2,671
$
$
2,229
statutory tax
rate
%
%
%
expected federal
income tax expense
tax effect of:
nontaxable
investment income
(371
)
(284
)
(201
)
tax reserve
adjustment
(40
)
foreign
operations
other, net
(12
)
(18
)
(2
)
total income tax
expense on income from continuing operations before minority interest
$
$
$
effective tax
rate on income from continuing operations before minority interest
%
%
%
the current income tax payable was $142 million and
$184 million at december 31, 2005 and 2004, respectively, and is included in
other liabilities in the consolidated balance sheet.
the net deferred tax asset comprises the tax effects
of temporary differences related to the following assets and liabilities:
(at december 31, in millions)
deferred tax assets
claims and claim adjustment expense reserves
$
1,615
$
1,666
unearned premium reserves
alternative minimum tax credit carryforward
net operating loss carryforward
other
total gross deferred tax assets
3,339
3,867
less valuation
allowance
net deferred tax
assets
3,241
3,739
deferred tax liabilities
deferred acquisition costs
investments
intangible assets
other
total gross
deferred tax liabilities
1,179
1,541
total deferred
income taxes
$
2,062
$
2,198
if the company determines that any of its deferred tax
assets will not result in future tax benefits, a valuation allowance must be
established for the portion of these assets that are not expected to be
realized. the net change in the valuation allowance for deferred tax assets was
a decrease of $30 million and an increase of $128 million for december 31, 2005
and 2004, respectively, in each year relating to foreign operations. based
predominantly upon a review of the companys anticipated future taxable income,
and also including all other available evidence, both positive and negative,
the companys management concluded that it is more likely than not that the net
deferred tax assets will be realized.
for tax return purposes, as of december 31, 2005, the
company had a net operation loss (nol) carryforward that expires, if unused, in
2017-2018. the amount and timing of realizing the benefit of nol carryforwards
depends on future taxable income and limitations imposed by tax laws. the
approximate amounts of those nols on a regular tax basis and an alternative
minimum tax (amt) basis were $114 million and $81 million, respectively. the
benefit of the nol carryforward has been recognized in the consolidated
financial statements.
the companys intercompany tax sharing agreement was
amended to include the spc companies effective with their acquisition on april
1, 2004.
u.s. income taxes have not been provided on $83
million of the companys foreign operations undistributed earnings as of
december 31, 2005, as such earnings are intended to be permanently reinvested
in those operations. furthermore, any taxes paid to foreign governments on
these earnings may be used as credits against the u.s. tax on any dividend
distributions from such earnings.
on october 22, 2004, congress enacted the american jobs creation act (ajca), which
provided a temporary incentive for u.s. corporations to repatriate earnings
previously reinvested in foreign subsidiaries to obtain an 85% dividends
received deduction. in december 2005, the company repatriated $158 million of
cumulative foreign earnings invested outside of the united states, which
resulted in an increase in income tax expense of $8 million for the year ended
december 31, 2005. see note 1.
12. shareholders
equity and dividend availability
mandatorily redeemable securities of
subsidiary trusts
tighi, in 1996, formed statutory subsidiary business
trusts under the laws of the state of delaware, which issued trust securities
representing undivided beneficial interests in the assets of the trust. the
gross proceeds of the trust securities were invested in junior subordinated
deferrable interest debentures (junior subordinated debentures) of its parent
(tpc). on april 9, 2003, tighi redeemed the $900 million aggregate principal of
the tighi 8.00% to 8.08% junior subordinated debentures held by the subsidiary
trusts. the subsidiary trusts, in turn, used these funds to redeem the $900
million liquidation value of the trust securities.
preferred stock
the companys preferred shareholders equity
represents the par value of preferred shares outstanding that the company
assumed in the merger related to the st. paul companies, inc. stock ownership
plan (sop) trust, less the remaining principal balance on the sop trust debt.
the sop trust borrowed funds from a u.s. underwriting subsidiary to finance the
purchase of the preferred shares, and the company guaranteed the sop debt. the
final payment on the sop debt was made in january 2005.
the sop trust may at any time convert any or all of
the preferred shares into shares of the companys common stock at a rate of
eight shares of common stock for each preferred share. the board of directors
has reserved a sufficient number of authorized common shares to satisfy the
conversion of all preferred shares issued to the sop trust and the redemption
of preferred shares to meet employee distribution requirements. upon the
redemption of preferred shares, the company will issue shares of common stock
to the trust to fulfill the redemption obligations. see note 14.
holders of preferred stock have a preference upon
liquidation, dissolution or winding up of the company of $100 per share.
in september 2005, the sop was merged into the st.
paul travelers 401(k) savings plan. see note 14.
common stock
on april 1, 2004, each issued and outstanding share of
tpc class a and class b common stock (including the associated preferred stock
purchase rights) was exchanged for 0.4334 of a share of the companys common
stock. see note 2.
the company is governed by the minnesota business
corporation act. all authorized shares of voting common stock have no par
value. shares of common stock reacquired are considered treasury shares. the
number of authorized shares of the company is 1.75 billion.
the articles of incorporation allow the company to
issue five million undesignated shares. the board of directors may designate
the type of shares and set the terms thereof. the board designated 1,450,000
shares as series b convertible preferred stock in connection with the 401(k)
savings plan.
on february 6, 2006, the company, under the st. paul
travelers companies, inc. 2004 incentive plan, issued 2,401,032 common stock
awards in the form of restricted stock, deferred stock and performance share
awards to participating officers and other key employees. the restricted stock
and deferred stock awards, totaling 2,029,480 shares, generally vest in full
after a two-year or three-year period from date of grant. the performance share
awards, totaling 371,552 target shares, represent shares which the recipient
may earn upon the companys attainment of certain performance goals. the
performance goals are based upon the companys adjusted return on equity over a
three-year performance period. if performance falls short of targeted
performance none or only a portion of the shares will vest after the three-year
performance period from date of grant. if performance exceeds targeted
performance, more than 100% (up to a maximum of 160%) of target shares will
vest after the three-year performance period from date of grant. the fair value
per share attributable to the common stock awards on the date of grant was
$44.79. see note 13.
treasury stock
all shares of tpc common stock that were held by the
company as treasury stock at the merger date of april 1, 2004, were cancelled
and retired as of that date.
the companys 2004 incentive plan, the legacy spc 1994
stock incentives plan and the legacy tpc 2002 incentive plan provide settlement
alternatives to employees in which the company repurchases shares to cover tax
withholding costs and exercise costs. at december 31, 2005 and 2004, the
company had purchased $47 million and $14 million, respectively, of its common
stock under this plan.
prior to the merger, tpcs board of directors approved
a $500 million share repurchase program. during 2003, tpc repurchased
approximately 1.1 million shares (as adjusted for the merger) of its common
stock at a total cost of $40 million. that repurchase program was terminated
upon completion of the merger.
common shares acquired under these plans are reported
as treasury stock in the consolidated balance sheet.
dividends
the companys insurance subsidiaries are subject to
various regulatory restrictions that limit the maximum amount of dividends
available to be paid to their parent without prior approval of insurance
regulatory authorities. a maximum of $2.56 billion is available in 2006 for
such dividends without prior approval of the connecticut insurance department
for connecticut-domiciled subsidiaries and the minnesota department of commerce
for minnesota-domiciled subsidiaries. the company received $968 million of
dividends from its insurance subsidiaries in 2005.
statutory net income and surplus
statutory net income of the companys insurance
subsidiaries was $2.92 billion, $1.58 billion, and $1.95 billion for the years
ended december 31, 2005, 2004 and 2003, respectively. statutory capital and
surplus of the companys insurance subsidiaries was $17.81 billion and $15.11
billion at december 31, 2005 and 2004, respectively.
accumulated other changes in equity from nonowner
sources, net of tax
changes in each component of accumulated other changes
in equity from nonowner sources were as follows:
(at and for the year ended december 31, in millions)
netunrealized
gains(losses)
on investment
securities
minimum
pension
liability
adjustment
other(1)
accumulated
otherchanges
in equity from
nonowner
sources
balance,
december 31, 2002
$
$
(68
)
$
(7
)
$
net change in
unrealized gains on investment securities, net of tax and minority interest
of $200
less:
reclassification adjustment for net realized gains included in net income,
net of tax and minority interest of $(17)
(21
)
(21
)
change in
minimum pension liability adjustment, net of tax of $33
change in other,
net of tax of $18
current period
change
balance,
december 31, 2003
1,060
(6
)
1,086
net change in
unrealized gains on investment securities, net of tax and minority interest
of $(85)
(168
)
(168
)
less:
reclassification adjustment for net realized gains included in net income,
net of tax and minority interest of $(13)
(24
)
(24
)
change in other,
net of tax of $(4)
current period
change
(192
)
(134
)
balance,
december 31, 2004
(6
)
net change in
unrealized gains on investment securities, net of tax and minority interest
of $(298)
(515
)
(515
)
less:
reclassification adjustment for net realized gains included in net income,
net of tax of $(13)
(26
)
(26
)
change in
minimum pension liability adjustment, net of tax of $(4)
(8
)
(8
)
change in other,
net of tax of $3
(52
)
(52
)
current period
change
(541
)
(8
)
(52
)
(601
)
balance,
december 31, 2005
$
$
(14
)
$
$
(1) includes foreign
currency translation adjustments, changes in value of private equity securities
and the cumulative effect of the change in accounting for derivative
instruments and hedging activities.
13. incentive plans
the company, following the merger, adopted the st.
paul travelers companies, inc. 2004 stock incentive plan (the 2004 incentive
plan) in july 2004. the purposes of the 2004 incentive plan are to reward the
efforts of the companys non-employee directors, executive officers and other
employees and to attract new personnel by providing incentives in the form of
stock-based awards. the 2004 incentive plan permits grants of nonqualified
stock options, incentive stock options, stock appreciation rights, restricted
stock, deferred stock, stock units, performance awards and other stock-based or
stock-denominated awards with respect to the companys common stock. the number
of shares of the companys common stock authorized for grant under the 2004
incentive plan is 35 million shares, subject to additional shares that may be
available for awards as described below.
in connection with the adoption of the 2004 incentive
plan, the legacy travelers property casualty
corp. 2002 stock incentive plan (legacy tpc 2002 incentive plan) and
the legacy st. paul global stock option plan
(legacy global stock option plan), which ceased granting awards
after 2001, were terminated. the legacy st.
paul amended and restated 1994 stock incentive plan (legacy spc 1994
stock plan) had expired on may 4, 2004 by its own terms, and other legacy spc
stock plans had either terminated or had no shares available for future grant.
the legacy tpc 2002 incentive plan was the only plan pursuant to which tpc
could make stock-based awards prior to the merger. outstanding grants were not
affected by the plans termination including the grant of reload options
related to prior option grants under the legacy tpc 2002 incentive plan and the
legacy spc 1994 stock plan.
the 2004 incentive plan is the only plan pursuant to
which future stock-based awards may be granted. in addition to the 35 million
shares initially authorized for issuance under the 2004 incentive plan, the
following will not be counted towards the 35 million shares available and will
be available for future grants under the 2004 incentive plan: (i) shares of
common stock subject to an award that expires unexercised, that is forfeited,
terminated or canceled, that is settled in cash or other forms of property, or
otherwise does not result in the issuance of shares of common stock, in whole
or in part; (ii) shares that are used to pay the exercise price of stock
options and shares used to pay withholding taxes on awards generally; and (iii)
shares purchased by the company on the open market using cash option exercise
proceeds; provided, however, that the increase in the number of shares of
common stock available for grant pursuant to such market purchases shall not be
greater than the number that could be repurchased at fair market value on the
date of exercise of the stock option giving rise to such option proceeds.
except for shares delivered to or retained in the
legacy tpc 2002 incentive plan in connection with the withholding of taxes
applicable to the exercise of outstanding options that have reload features,
the provisions of the preceding paragraph that result in shares becoming
available for future grants under the 2004 incentive plan also apply to any
awards granted under the legacy spc 1994 stock plan and the legacy tpc 2002
incentive plan that were outstanding on the effective date of the 2004
incentive plan.
the company, following the merger, also adopted a
compensation program for non-employee directors (the 2004 director compensation
program). under the 2004 director compensation program, non-employee directors
compensation consists of an annual retainer, a deferred stock award and a stock
option award. each non-employee director may choose to receive all or a portion
of his or her annual retainer and any committee chair or co-chair fees paid in
the form of cash, common stock or deferred stock. deferred stock for the annual
retainer, and committee chair and co-chair fees, is elected pursuant to the st.
paul travelers deferred compensation plan for non-employee directors that the
board adopted after the merger and is vested upon grant. the annual deferred
stock awards vest one year after the date of award. any of the deferred stock
awards may accumulate until distribution at a future date or upon termination
of a directors service. the shares of the companys common stock issued under
the 2004 director compensation program, including shares of deferred stock, are
awarded under the 2004 incentive plan.
fixed stock option awards
2004 incentive plan
the company established an equity awards program under
the 2004 incentive plan, pursuant to which the company may issue stock option
awards to eligible officers and key employees. under the equity awards program,
stock option awards are granted having a ten-year term with an exercise price
equal to the fair market value of the companys common stock on the date of
grant. the stock options granted under this program through 2005 generally vest
over a four year period, with 50% of the option shares vesting on the 2nd
anniversary of the date of grant, and 25% of the option shares vesting on each
of the 3rd and 4th anniversaries of the grant date.
beginning in 2006, stock option awards granted under this program will
generally vest in full after a three-year period from date of grant. except as
the compensation committee of the board may allow in the future, stock options
cannot be sold or transferred by the participant.
legacy tpc 2002 incentive plan
on april 1, 2004, in accordance with the merger
agreement, the outstanding stock options to purchase shares of tpc common stock
were converted into options to purchase the companys common stock. these stock
options retained substantially the same terms and conditions that were
applicable prior to the conversion. the 0.4334 merger exchange ratio was
applied to the outstanding tpc stock options to reflect this conversion.
the tpc stock options awards granted under the legacy
tpc 2002 incentive plan have a ten-year term with an exercise price equal to
the fair value of the companys common stock on the date of grant (as adjusted
to reflect the merger). stock options granted under this plan prior to april
27, 2004, generally vest 20% each year over a five-year period. stock options
granted under this plan from april 27, 2004 until the plan termination on july
28, 2004, generally vest over a four-year period, with 50% of the option shares
vesting on the 2nd anniversary of the date of grant, and 25% of the
option shares vesting on each of the 3rd and 4th
anniversaries of the grant date. prior to january 23, 2003, certain stock
option awards granted under the tpc 2002 incentive plan permitted an employee
exercising an option to be granted a new option (a reload option) in an amount
equal to the number of shares of the tpc common stock used to satisfy both the
exercise price and withholding taxes due upon exercise of an option. prior to
the merger, the reload options were granted at an exercise price equal to the
fair market value of tpcs common stock on the date of grant, and after the
merger the reload options will be granted at an exercise price equal to the
fair market value of the companys common stock on the date of grant. the
reload options vest six months after the grant date and are exercisable for the
remaining term of the related original option.
legacy spc 1994 stock plan and
global stock option plan
on april 1, 2004, in connection with the merger, the
company assumed 23 million outstanding spc stock options, of which
approximately 4 million remained unvested related to legacy spc equity-based
compensation plans. these stock options retained the same terms and conditions
that were applicable prior to the merger. under the spc stock option programs,
stock option awards were granted having a ten year term with an exercise price
equal to the fair value of the companys common stock on the date of grant.
generally, options vest 25% each year over a four-year period. certain stock
option awards granted under the spc 1994 stock plan between february 2002 and
november 10, 2003 permitted an employee exercising an option to be granted a
new option (a reload option) in an amount equal to the number of shares of the
company common stock used to satisfy the exercise price due upon exercise of an
option. the reload options are granted at an exercise price equal to the fair
market value of the company common stock on the date of grant, vest one year
after the grant date and are exercisable for the remaining term of the related
original option.
information with respect to stock option activity
under the companys stock option plans for the years ended december 31, 2005,
2004 and 2003 is as follows:
options
weighted
average
exercise
price
options
weighted
average
exercise
price
options
weighted
average
exercise
price
outstanding,
beginning of year
47,844,259
$
41.24
30,422,539
$
41.19
32,988,349
$
40.68
granted:
original:
newly granted
4,416,098
37.19
1,327,575
41.67
198,269
37.31
converted (1)
350,188
62.79
reload
544,931
42.54
553,583
39.21
477,121
36.48
assumed/replacement
23,049,803
39.50
exercised
(5,591,403
)
29.62
(4,420,171
)
28.53
(1,721,435
)
23.42
forfeited
(3,348,976
)
46.65
(3,439,258
)
44.09
(1,519,765
)
48.11
outstanding, end
of year
43,864,909
$
41.81
47,844,259
$
41.24
30,422,539
$
41.19
(1) represents
the conversion of the outstanding stock options to purchase ciri stock into options
to purchase the companys common stock.
the following table summarizes the information about
stock options outstanding under the companys stock option plans at december
31, 2005:
options outstanding
options exercisable
range of
exercise prices
number
outstanding
weighted
average
contractual
life
remaining
weighted
average
exercise
price
number
exercisable
weighted
average
exercise
price
under $30.00
4,763,809
2.4years
$
26.51
4,761,625
$
26.51
$30.00$34.99
3,704,109
5.3 years
31.84
3,621,694
31.80
$35.00$39.99
7,582,484
6.9 years
37.02
3,426,708
36.88
$40.00$44.99
14,633,288
6.4 years
42.76
9,212,095
42.87
$45.00$49.99
7,752,318
4.9 years
48.10
7,568,326
48.15
$50.00$54.99
1,501,365
4.0 years
52.16
1,494,124
52.17
over $54.99
3,927,536
4.6 years
59.05
3,305,031
58.98
43,864,909
5.4 years
$
41.81
33,389,603
$
41.93
all original and reload stock options granted under
the companys stock option programs had an exercise price equal to the market
value of the companys common stock on the date of grant. the stock option
awards of spc assumed in the merger on april 1, 2004, the awards of ciri
converted on august 4, 2004, and the replacement awards granted on august 20,
2002 retained the intrinsic value of the awards immediately prior to being
assumed, converted or replaced and therefore the exercise price either exceeded
the market value or was less than the market value on those respective dates.
the following table presents the weighted average exercise price and weighted
average grant date fair value information with respect to these grants:
options
weighted
average
exercise
price
weighted
average
grant
date fair
value
original awards
exercise price
equal to market at grant
4,961,029
$
37.78
$
9.10
original awards
exercise price
equal to market at grant
1,881,158
$
40.97
$
9.27
exercise price
exceeds market at grant
350,188
$
62.79
$
6.42
assumed awards
exercise price
exceeds market at grant
13,287,228
$
45.13
$
7.58
exercise price
less than market at grant
9,762,575
$
31.88
$
12.40
total granted
25,281,149
$
39.95
$
9.55
original awards
exercise price
equal to market at grant
675,390
$
36.73
$
2.86
stock option fair value information
the fair value effect of stock options is derived by
application of a variation of the black-scholes option pricing model.
the significant assumptions used in estimating the
fair value on the date of the grant for original options and reload options
granted in 2005, 2004 and 2003 and for the awards assumed on april 1, 2004 from
spc at the merger were as follows:
expected life of stock options
6 years
3years
3years
expected volatility of the companys stock (1)
32.0
%
32.1
%
29.4
%
risk-free interest rate
3.96
%
2.50
%
2.04
%
expected annual dividend per share
$
0.89
$
0.88
$
0.60
expected annual forfeiture rate
%
%
%
(1) the expected
volatility is based on the average volatility of an industry peer group of
entities because the company only became publicly traded in march 2002.
in connection with spc options assumed in the merger,
the estimated fair value of all the outstanding spc stock options at april 1,
2004 was $186 million and was included in the determination of the purchase
price based upon the announcement date market price per share of spc common
stock, using an option-pricing model. the unvested stock option awards require
the holder to render service during the vesting period and are therefore
considered unearned compensation. at april 1, 2004, the estimated fair values
of the unvested awards were $35 million and have been included in unearned
compensation as a separate component of equity. the unearned compensation
expense is being recognized as a charge to income over the remaining vesting
period.
in addition, commercial insurance resources, inc.
(ciri) had equity-based compensation plans in which awards were granted in ciris
privately held common stock. in connection with the travelers indemnity companys
purchase of the minority interest of ciri in 2004, the company converted ciris
outstanding equity-based awards into awards in the companys common stock. the
converted awards retained the same terms and conditions that were applicable
prior to the conversion. the conversion of ciri outstanding nonvested options
into options to purchase the companys common stock was considered a
modification and therefore the modification guidance of fas 123 was applied to
the converted awards. for these converted options, the excess of the fair value
of the modified options issued over the fair value of the original options at
the date of exchange was added to the remaining unrecognized compensation cost
of the original option and recognized over the remaining vesting period.
under fas 123, reload options are treated as separate
grants from the original grants and as a result are separately valued when
granted. reload options are exercisable for the remaining term of the related
original option and therefore would generally have a shorter estimated life.
shares received through option exercises under the reload program are subject
to restriction on sale. discounts (as measured by the estimated cost of
protection) have been applied to the fair value of reload options granted to
reflect these sales restrictions.
restricted stock, deferred stock and
performance share award programs
2004 incentive plan
the company may issue awards of restricted stock and
deferred stock to eligible officers and key employees pursuant to the 2004
incentive plan. such awards include restricted stock grants under the capital
accumulation program (cap) and equity awards program established pursuant to
the 2004 incentive plan. awards issued under the cap program are in the form of
restricted stock and the number of shares included in the restricted stock
award is calculated at a 10% discount from the market price on the date of the
award and generally vest in full after a two-year period from the date of grant.
the cap program has been discontinued following the issuance of cap awards in
february 2006. other restricted stock awards issued under the equity awards
program generally vest in full after a three-year period from the date of
grant. except under limited
circumstances, during this period the stock cannot be
sold or transferred by the participant, who is required to render service to
the company during the restricted period. awards granted to non-u.s.
participants are in the form of deferred stock awards. these deferred stock
awards are granted at market price and generally vest after three years from
the date of grant and are subject to the same conditions as the restricted
stock awards except that the shares are not issued until the vesting criteria
are satisfied.
on october 25, 2005, the company approved a
performance share awards program pursuant to the 2004 incentive plan. under the
program, the company may issue performance share awards to certain employees of
the company who hold positions of vice president (or its equivalent) or above.
the performance awards represent target shares that provide the recipient the
right to earn shares of the companys common stock based upon the companys
attainment of certain performance goals. the program becomes effective
beginning in 2006. the performance goals for performance awards granted in 2006
are based on the companys adjusted return on equity over a three-year
performance period. if performance falls short of targeted performance, none or
only a portion of the shares will vest after the three-year performance period
from date of grant. if performance exceeds targeted performance, more than 100%
(up to a maximum of 160%) of target shares will vest after the three-year
performance period from date of grant.
legacy tpc 2002 incentive plans
on april 1, 2004, in accordance with the merger
agreement, the restricted stock awards and deferred stock awards of the legacy
tpc 2002 incentive plan were converted to restricted stock awards and deferred
stock awards in the companys common stock. these restricted stock awards and
deferred stock awards retained substantially the same terms and conditions that
were applicable prior to the conversion. the 0.4334 merger exchange ratio was
applied to the outstanding tpc restricted stock awards and deferred stock
awards to reflect this conversion.
the tpc restricted stock awards granted under the
legacy tpc 2002 incentive plan were awarded to eligible officers and key employees
through tpcs capital accumulation program (tpc cap). under this plan, certain
tpc cap participants received part of their annual bonus awards in restricted
stock, and at their election, part in stock options. the number of shares
included in the restricted stock award was calculated at a 25% discount from
the market price on the date of the award and generally vested in full after a
three-year period. except under limited circumstances, during this period the
stock cannot be sold or transferred by the participant, who is required to
render service to the company during the restricted period. awards granted to
non-u.s. participants were in the form of deferred stock awards. these deferred
stock awards are subject to the same conditions as the restricted stock awards
except that the shares are not issued until the vesting criteria are satisfied.
legacy spc 1994 stock plan
on april 1, 2004, in connection with the merger, the
company assumed approximately 240,000 of outstanding spc restricted stock awards
related to spc equity-based compensation plans. these restricted stock awards
retained the same terms and conditions that were applicable prior to the
merger. under the spc 1994 stock plan, the awards of restricted stock were
subject to completing a specified objective or period of employment, generally
one to five years. under the spc capital accumulation plan, implemented in
2002, the number of shares included in the restricted stock award is calculated
at a 10% discount from the market price at the date of the award and generally
vests in full after a two-year period. the unvested restricted stock awards
require the holder to render service during the vesting period and are
therefore considered unearned compensation. at april 1, 2004, the estimated fair
value of the unvested restricted stock awards subject to amortization was $9
million and has been included in unearned compensation as a separate component
of equity. the unearned compensation expense is being recognized as a charge to
income over the remaining vesting period.
information with respect to restricted stock and
deferred stock awards is as follows:
new shares granted
2,257,101
1,668,862
947,233
spc assumed awards april 1, 2004
237,592
weighted average fair value per share at issuance
$
36.29
$
37.03
$
37.26
unearned compensation expense is recognized as a
charge to income ratably over the vesting period. the after-tax compensation
cost charged to earnings for these restricted stock and deferred stock awards
was $40 million, $26 million and $17 million for the years ended december 31,
2005, 2004 and 2003, respectively.
other incentive plans
in addition to the companys equity-based compensation
plans discussed above, nuveen investments had an equity-based compensation plan
in which awards were granted in nuveen investments publicly traded common
stock. the after-tax compensation cost associated with these awards included in
the companys 2004 net income was approximately $9 million. the compensation
cost associated with the nuveen investments equity-based plan was excluded
from the companys results in 2005 due to the divestiture of nuveen investments
(see note 3).
14. pension plans, retirement
benefits and savings plans
the company sponsors a qualified non-contributory
defined benefit pension plan, which covers substantially all employees and
provides benefits under a cash balance formula, except that employees
satisfying certain age and service requirements remain covered by a prior final
pay formula. prior to december 31, 2004, both tpc and spc sponsored qualified
noncontributory defined benefit pension plans. these plans were merged to form
one company plan on december 31, 2004. in addition, the company and tpc sponsor
nonqualified defined benefit pension plans which cover certain
highly-compensated employees and also sponsor postretirement health and life
insurance benefit plans for employees satisfying certain age and service requirements
and for certain retirees.
obligations and funded status
the following tables summarize the funded status,
obligations and amounts recognized in the consolidated balance sheet for the
companys benefit plans. the company uses a december 31 measurement date for
its pension and postretirement benefit plans.
qualified domestic plan
non-qualified and foreign plans
total
(for the year ended december31, in
millions)
change
in projected benefit obligation
benefit
obligation at beginning of year
$
1,605
$
$
$
$
1,771
$
spc acquisition
1,082
benefits earned
interest cost on
benefit obligation
actuarial loss
(gain)
benefits paid
(106
)
(79
)
(12
)
(9
)
(118
)
(88
)
foreign currency
exchange rate change
(8
)
(8
)
benefits
obligation at end of year
$
1,750
$
1,605
$
$
$
1,942
$
1,771
change
in plan assets
fair value of
plan assets at beginning of year
$
1,730
$
$
$
$
1,818
$
spc acquisition
1,089
1,169
actual return on
plan assets
company
contributions
benefits paid
(106
)
(79
)
(12
)
(9
)
(118
)
(88
)
foreign currency
exchange rate change
(9
)
(9
)
fair value of
plan assets at end of year
$
1,786
$
1,730
$
$
$
1,881
$
1,818
reconciliation
of prepaid (accrued) benefit cost and total amount recognized
funded status of
plan
$
$
$
(97
)
$
(78
)
$
(61
)
$
unrecognized:
prior service
benefit
(24
)
(30
)
(2
)
(1
)
(26
)
(31
)
net actuarial
loss (gain)
net amount
recognized
$
$
$
(56
)
$
(61
)
$
$
amounts
recognized in the statement of financial position consist of:
prepaid benefit
cost
$
$
$
$
$
$
accrued benefit
liability
(85
)
(76
)
(85
)
(76
)
accumulated
other changes in equity from nonowner sources  minimum pension liability
total
$
$
$
(56
)
$
(61
)
$
$
postretirement
benefit plans
(at and for the year ended
december 31, in millions)
change
in projected benefit obligation
benefit
obligation at beginning of year
$
$
spc acquisition
benefits earned
interest cost on
benefit obligation
actuarial loss
(gain)
(35
)
benefits paid
(19
)
(14
)
foreign currency
exchange rate change
benefit
obligation at end of year
$
$
change
in plan assets
fair value of
plan assets at beginning of year
$
$
spc acquisition
actual return on
plan assets
company
contributions
benefits paid
(19
)
(14
)
foreign currency
exchange rate change
fair value of
plan assets at end of year
$
$
reconciliation
of prepaid (accrued) benefit cost and total amount recognized
funded status of
plan
$
(257
)
$
(286
)
unrecognized:
prior service
benefit
net actuarial
loss (gain)
(28
)
net amount recognized
$
(285
)
$
(280
)
amounts
recognized in the statement of financial position consist of:
prepaid benefit
cost
$
$
accrued benefit
liability
(285
)
(280
)
accumulated
other changes in equity from nonowner sources  minimum pension liability
net
amount recognized
$
(285
)
$
(280
)
the total
accumulated benefit obligation for the companys defined benefit pension plans
was $1.88 billion and $1.70 billion at december 31, 2005 and 2004,
respectively. the qualified domestic plan accounted for $1.69 billion and $1.54
billion of the total accumulated benefit obligation at december 31, 2005 and
2004, respectively, whereas the non-qualified and foreign plans accounted for
$0.19 billion and$0.16 billion of the total accumulated benefit
obligation at december 31, 2005 and 2004, respectively.
for pension plans with an accumulated benefit
obligation in excess of plan assets, the aggregate projected benefit obligation
and the aggregate accumulated benefit obligation were $186 million and $185
million, respectively, at december 31, 2005 and $102 million and $99 million at
december 31, 2004, respectively. the fair value of plan assets for the above
plans was $88 million and $23 million at december 31, 2005 and 2004,
respectively.
the company does not have a best estimate of
contributions expected to be paid to the qualified pension plan during the next
fiscal year at this time.
assumptions and health care cost trend rate sensitivity
(at and for the year ended december 31,)
assumptions used to determine benefit
obligations
discount rate
5.75%
6.00%
future compensation increase rate
4.00%
4.00%
assumptions used to determine net periodic benefit
cost
discount rate
6.00%
6.00%to6.25%
expected long-term rate of return on assets
8.00%
8.00%
assumed health care cost trend rates
following year:
medical (before
age 65)
9.00%
10.00%
medical (age 65
and older)
11.00%
10.00%
rate to which the cost trend rate is assumed to
decline (ultimate trend rate)
5.00%
5.00%
year that the rate reaches the ultimate trend rate:
medical (before
age 65)
medical (age 65
and older)
the discount rate assumption used to determine the
benefit obligation is based on the moodys aa corporate bond index adjusted by
25 basis points to reflect the long duration nature of the pension obligation
and adjusted to the nearest quarter rate. the discount rate is then back-tested
by comparison to a yield curve that reflects the hypothetical portfolio of high
quality bonds (rated aa or higher by a recognized rating agency) for which the
timing and amount of cash outflows approximates the estimated payouts of the
plan.
in choosing the expected long-term rate of return, the
companys pension plan investment committee considered the historical returns
of equity and fixed income markets in conjunction with todays economic and
financial market conditions.
as an indicator of sensitivity, increasing the assumed
health care cost trend rate by 1% would have increased the accumulated
postretirement benefit obligation by $47 million at december 31, 2005, and the
aggregate of the service and interest cost components of net postretirement
benefit expense by $4 million for the year ended december 31, 2005. decreasing
the assumed health care cost trend rate by 1% would have decreased the
accumulated postretirement benefit obligation at december 31, 2005 by $38
million and the aggregate of the service and interest cost components of net
postretirement benefit expense by $3 million for the year ended december 31,
2005.
on december 8, 2003, the medicare prescription drug,
improvement and modernization act of 2003 (2003 medicare act) was enacted. the
2003 medicare act introduces a prescription drug benefit under medicare part d
as well as a federal subsidy to sponsors of retiree health care benefit plans
that provide a benefit that is at least actuarially equivalent to medicare part
d. the company has concluded that prescription drug benefits available under
the spc postretirement benefit plan are actuarially equivalent to medicare part
d and thus qualify for the federal subsidy under the 2003 medicare act. the
company also expects that the federal subsidy will offset or reduce the companys
share of the cost of the underlying postretirement prescription drug coverage
on which the subsidy is based. as a result, the estimated effect of the 2003
medicare act was reflected in the purchase accounting remeasurement of the spc
postretirement benefit plan on april 1, 2004. the effect of this adjustment was
a $29 million reduction (with no tax effect) in the accumulated postretirement
benefit obligation as of april 1, 2004 and a reduction of $2 million in net
periodic postretirement benefit cost for the year ended december 31, 2004. see
note 1.
components of net periodic benefit
cost
the following table summarizes the components of net
benefit expense recognized in the consolidated statement of income for the
benefit plans for the years ended december 31, 2005, 2004 and 2003.
pension plans
postretirement benefit
plans
(inmillions)
service cost
$
$
$
$
$
$
interest cost on
benefit obligation
expected return
on plan assets
(139
)
(117
)
(39
)
(2
)
(1
)
amortization of
unrecognized:
prior service
cost
(6
)
(6
)
(6
)
net actuarial
loss
net benefit
expense
$
$
$
$
$
$
plan assets
the percentage of the fair value of pension plan
assets held by asset category is as follows:
(at december 31,)
equity securities
%
%
debt securities
%
%
cash
%
%
other
%
%
total
%
%
pension plan assets are invested for the exclusive
benefit of the plan participants and beneficiaries and are intended, over time,
to satisfy the benefit obligations under the plan. risk tolerance is
established through consideration of plan liabilities, plan funded status, and
corporate financial condition. the asset mix guidelines have been established
and are reviewed quarterly. these guidelines are intended to serve as tools to
facilitate the investment of plan assets to maximize long-term total return and
the ongoing oversight of the plans investment performance. the investment
portfolio contains a diversified mix of equity and fixed-income investments.
equity investments are diversified across u.s. and non-u.s. stocks. other
assets such as partnerships and real estate are used to enhance long-term
returns while improving portfolio diversification. investment risk is measured
and monitored on an ongoing basis through daily and monthly investment
portfolio review, annual liability measurements, and periodic asset/liability
studies.
weighted average target asset allocations at december
31, 2005 by asset category were as follows:
asset category
plan
assets
equity securities
%
debt securities
%
cash
%
other
%
equity securities include 797,600 shares of the
companys common stock with a market value of $36 million at december 31, 2005.
the companys other post-retirement benefit plan
weighted-average asset allocations at december 31, 2005 and 2004 by asset
category were as follows:
asset category
debt securities
%
%
cash
%
%
estimated future benefit payments
benefits expected to be paid, which reflect estimated
future employee service, are estimated to be:
expectedpaymentsbyperiod(inmillions)
pensionplans
postretirement
benefitplans
prescription
drugsubsidy
$
$
$
2011 through 2015
savings plan
the company, in september 2005, merged the travelers
401(k) savings plan, the st. paul companies, inc. savings plus plan (spp), and
the st. paul companies, inc. stock ownership plan (sop) into one new plan, the
st. paul travelers 401(k) savings plan (the savings plan). substantially all
company employees are eligible to participate in the savings plan. in 2005, the
company matched employee contributions up to 5% of eligible pay, with a maximum
annual match of $5,000 which becomes 100% vested after three years of service.
the match is primarily in the form of the companys common stock which can be
reinvested at any time into any other investment option. the expense related to
this plan was $63 million for the year ended december 31, 2005.
legacy tpc 401(k) savings plan
prior to the september 2005 plan merger, the company
had a 401(k) savings plan under which substantially all legacy tpc employees
and company employees hired after april 1, 2004, were eligible to participate.
in 2004, the company matched employee contributions up to 5% of eligible pay
but not more than $2,500 annually. prior to 2004, the company matched employee
contributions up to 3% of eligible pay but not more than $1,500 annually. the
expense related to this plan was $34 million and $20 million for the years
ended december 31, 2004 and 2003, respectively.
legacy spc 401(k) savings plus and
stock ownership plans
prior to the september 2005 plan merger and in
connection with the merger with spc, the company assumed the st. paul
companies, inc. savings plus plan (spp), a 401(k) savings plan and the st. paul
companies, inc. stock ownership plan (sop). substantially all employees who
were hired by legacy spc before april 1, 2004 were eligible to participate in
these plans. in 2004 under the spp, the company matched 100% of employees
contributions up to a maximum of 6% of their salary. the match was in the form
of preferred shares, to the extent available in the sop, or in the companys
common shares. also allocated to participants were preferred shares equal to
the value of dividends on previously allocated shares.
to finance the preferred stock purchase for future
allocation to qualified employees, the sop borrowed $150 million at 9.4% from a
primary u.s. underwriting subsidiary. as the principal and interest of the
trusts loan was paid, a pro rata amount of preferred stock was released for
allocation to participating employees. each share of preferred stock pays a
dividend of $11.72 annually and is currently convertible into eight shares of
the companys common stock. preferred stock dividends on all shares held by the
trust were used to pay a portion of the sop obligation. in addition to
dividends paid to the trust, additional cash contributions were made to the sop
as necessary in order to meet the sops debt obligation. the sops debt
obligation was paid off in january 2005 with a final payment of $5 million;
consequently, all preferred stock dividends are now paid to preferred
stockholders. the sop allocated the final 71,346 preferred shares in 2004. the
sop has no preferred shares available for future allocations.
all common shares and the common stock equivalent of
all preferred shares held by the sop are considered outstanding for diluted eps
computations and dividends paid on all shares are charged to retained earnings.
the company follows the provisions of statement of
position 76-3, accounting practices for certain employee stock ownership
plans, and related interpretations in accounting for this plan. the company
recorded an expense of $5 million in 2004.
15. leases
rent expense was $219 million, $207 million and $115
million in 2005, 2004 and 2003, respectively.
future minimum annual rental payments under
noncancellable operating leases are $173 million, $157 million, $124 million,
$87 million, $52 million and $164 million for 2006, 2007, 2008, 2009, 2010 and
2011 and thereafter, respectively. future sublease rental income aggregating
approximately $55 million will partially offset these commitments.
16. derivative
financial instruments and fair value of financial instruments
derivative financial instruments
the
company may use derivative financial instruments, including interest rate
swaps, equity swaps, credit derivatives, options, financial futures and forward
contracts, as a means of hedging exposure to interest rate, equity price change
and foreign currency risk. the companys insurance subsidiaries do not hold or
issue derivatives for trading purposes.
derivative instruments designated as hedging instruments
for
a derivative instrument to qualify as a hedge, the hedge relationship must be
designated and formally documented at inception detailing the particular risk
management objective and strategy for the hedge, which includes the item and
risk that is being hedged, the derivative that is being used, as well as how
effectiveness is being assessed. a derivative has to be highly effective in
accomplishing the objective of offsetting either changes in fair value or cash
flows for the risk being hedged. the effectiveness of these hedging
relationships is evaluated on a retrospective and prospective basis using
quantitative measures of correlation. if a hedge relationship is found to be
ineffective, it no longer qualifies as a hedge, and any excess gains or losses
attributable to such ineffectiveness as well as subsequent changes in fair
value are recognized in net realized investment gains (losses). the recognition
of gains or losses on derivative instruments that have been designated and
qualify as a hedge depends upon whether the derivative instrument is a fair
value hedge, a cash flow hedge or a foreign currency hedge.
the
company has foreign currency hedges of net investments in foreign operations in
which derivatives (foreign currency forward contracts) hedge the foreign
currency exposure. the effective portion of the change in fair value of the
derivative hedging the net investment, including any forward premium or
discount, is reflected in the accumulated other changes in equity from nonowner
sources as part of the foreign currency translation adjustment. for the years
ended december 31, 2005 and 2004, the amount included in the foreign currency
translation adjustment in equity from nonowner sources was a $2 million loss
and a $4 million loss, respectively. during 2005, the company incurred net
realized losses of less than $1 million from hedge ineffectiveness, and in
2004, the company had no net realized gains or losses from hedge
ineffectiveness.
derivative instruments not designated as hedging instruments
derivatives
that are not designated or do not qualify as hedges are carried at fair value
with changes in value reflected in net realized investment gains (losses). the
company has certain u.s. treasury futures contracts and foreign currency
forward contracts, which are not designated as hedges at december 31, 2005 and
2004.
the
company engaged in u.s. treasury note futures transactions to modify the
duration of specific assets within the investment portfolio. the company enters
into 90-day futures contracts on 2-year, 5-year, 10-year and 30-year u.s.
treasury notes which require a daily mark-to-market settlement with the broker.
the notional value of the open u.s. treasury futures contracts was $1.20
billion and $1.33 billion at december 31, 2005 and december 31, 2004,
respectively. these derivative instruments are not designated and do not
qualify as hedges under fas 133 and as such the daily mark-to-market changes in
fair value are reflected in net realized investment gains (losses). net
realized investment gains (losses) in 2005 and 2004 included net gains of $13
million and net losses of $44 million, respectively, related to u.s. treasury
futures contracts which are settled daily.
the
company purchases investments that have embedded derivatives, primarily
convertible debt securities. these embedded derivatives are carried at fair
value with changes in value reflected in net realized investment gains
(losses). derivatives embedded in convertible debt securities are reported on a
combined basis with their host instrument and are classified as fixed maturity
securities.
the
company owns 6 million stock purchase warrants of platinum underwriters, a
publicly-held company. these warrants are not designated and do not qualify as
hedges under fas 133 and as such the mark-to-market changes in fair value are
reflected in net realized gains (losses).
during
the third quarter of 2004, the company terminated its interest rate swap agreements
which had been acquired in the merger. the notional value of these swaps was
$730 million at the time of the termination. these interest rate swap
agreements were used to manage exposure of certain of its fixed rate debt to
changes in interest rates. these derivative instruments did not qualify for
continued hedge accounting following the merger and, as such, the
mark-to-market changes in fair value were reflected in net realized investment
gains and losses prior to the termination of these agreements.
fair value of financial instruments
the
company uses various financial instruments in the normal course of its
business. certain insurance contracts are excluded by fas 107, disclosures about fair value of financial instruments,
and, therefore, are not included in the amounts discussed.
at
december 31, 2005 and 2004, investments in fixed maturities had a fair value,
which equaled carrying value, of $58.98 billion and $54.26 billion,
respectively. the fair value of investments in fixed maturities for which a
quoted market price or dealer quote are not available was $456 million and $574
million at december31, 2005 and 2004, respectively. see note 1.
the
carrying values of cash, short-term securities, mortgage loans, investment
income accrued, and payables for securities lending and repurchase agreements
approximated their fair values. see notes 1 and 6.
the
carrying values of $1.11 billion and $1.14 billion of financial instruments
classified as other assets approximated their fair values at december 31, 2005
and 2004, respectively. the carrying values of $5.33 billion and $4.83 billion
of financial instruments classified as other liabilities at december 31, 2005
and 2004, respectively, also approximated their fair values. fair value is
determined using various methods including discounted cash flows, as
appropriate for the various financial instruments.
the
carrying value and fair value of the companys debt at december 31, 2005 was
$5.85 billion and $5.82 billion, respectively. the respective totals at
december 31, 2004 were $6.31 billion and $6.30 billion.
the
fair value of commercial paper included in debt outstanding at december 31,
2005 and 2004 approximated its book value because of its short-term nature. for
other debt, the fair value estimate was based upon the bid price at december
31, 2005 and 2004.
17. contingencies,
commitments and guarantees
contingencies
the
following section describes the major pending legal proceedings, other than ordinary
routine litigation incidental to the business, to which the company or any of
its subsidiaries is a party or to which any of the companys property is
subject.
asbestos and environmental-related proceedings
in
the ordinary course of its insurance business, the company receives claims for
insurance arising under policies issued by the company asserting alleged
injuries and damages from asbestos, hazardous waste and other toxic substances
which are the subject of related coverage litigation, including, among others,
the litigation described below. the company continues to be subject to
aggressive asbestos-related litigation. the conditions surrounding the final
resolution of these claims and the related litigation continue to change.
tpc
is involved in three significant proceedings (including a bankruptcy
proceeding) relating to acands, inc. (acands), formerly a national distributor
and installer of products containing asbestos. the proceedings involve disputes
as to whether and to what extent any of acands potential liabilities for
current or future bodily injury asbestos claims are covered by insurance
policies issued by tpc. the status of the various proceedings is described
below.
acands
filed for bankruptcy in september 2002 (in
re: acands, inc., pending in the u.s. bankruptcy court for the
district of delaware). in its proposed plan of reorganization, acands sought to
establish a trust to pay asbestos bodily injury claims against it and sought to
assign to the trust its rights under the insurance policies issued by tpc. the
proposed plan and disclosure statement filed by acands claimed that acands had
settled the vast majority of asbestos-related bodily injury claims currently
pending against it for approximately $2.80 billion. acands asserts that, based
on a prior agreement between tpc and acands and acands interpretation of the
july 31, 2003 arbitration panel ruling described below, tpc is liable for 45%
of the $2.80 billion. on january 26, 2004, the bankruptcy court issued a
decision rejecting confirmation of acands proposed plan of reorganization. the
bankruptcy court found, consistent with tpcs objections to acands proposed
plan, that the proposed plan was not fundamentally fair, was not proposed in
good faith and did not comply with section 524(g) of the bankruptcy code.
acands has filed a notice of appeal of the bankruptcy courts decision and has
filed objections to the bankruptcy courts findings of fact and conclusions of
law in the united states district court. tpc has moved to dismiss the appeal
and objections and has also filed an opposition to acands objections.
an
arbitration was commenced in january 2001 to determine whether and to what
extent acands financial obligations for bodily injury asbestos claims are
subject to insurance policy aggregate limits. on july 31, 2003, the arbitration
panel ruled in favor of tpc that asbestos bodily injury claims against acands
are subject to the aggregate limits of the policies issued to acands, which
have been exhausted. in october 2003, acands commenced a lawsuit seeking to
vacate the arbitration award as beyond the panels scope of authority (acands, inc. v. travelers casualty and surety co.,
u.s.d.ct. e.d. pa.). on september 16, 2004, the district court entered an order
denying acands motion to vacate the arbitration award. on january 19, 2006,
the united states court of appeals for the third circuit reversed the district
courts decision and declared the arbitration award void on procedural grounds.
on february8, 2006, tpc filed a motion to stay the issuance of the third circuits
mandate in anticipation of tpcs petition for a writ of certiorari to the
united states supreme court.
in
the other proceeding, a related case pending before the same court and
commenced in september 2000 (acands v.
travelers casualty and surety co., u.s.d.ct., e.d. pa.), acands
sought a declaration of the extent to which the asbestos bodily injury claims
against acands are subject to occurrence limits under insurance policies issued
by tpc. tpc filed a motion to dismiss this action based upon the july 31, 2003
arbitration decision described above. the district court found the dispute was
moot as a result of the arbitration panels decision. the district court,
therefore, based on the arbitration panels decision, dismissed the case. if the
january 19, 2006 ruling of the third circuit described in the paragraph above survives
further appeal, this case will be reinstated.
the
company continues to believe it has meritorious positions in these
acands-related proceedings and intends to litigate vigorously.
in october2001 and april2002, two
purported class action suits (wise v.
travelers and meninger v.
travelers), were filed against tpc and other insurers (not including
spc) in state court in west virginia. these cases were subsequently
consolidated into a single proceeding in the circuit court of kanawha county,
west virginia. plaintiffs allege that the insurer defendants engaged in unfair
trade practices by inappropriately handling and settling asbestos claims. the
plaintiffs seek to reopen large numbers of settled asbestos claims and to
impose liability for damages, including punitive damages, directly on insurers.
lawsuits similar to wise were
filed in massachusetts and hawaii (these suits are collectively referred to as
the statutory and hawaii actions). also, in november2001, plaintiffs in consolidated asbestos
actions pending before a mass tort panel of judges in west virginia state court
moved to amend their complaint to name tpc as a defendant, alleging that tpc
and other insurers breached alleged duties to certain users of asbestos
products. in march2002, the court granted the motion to amend. plaintiffs
seek damages, including punitive damages. lawsuits seeking similar relief and
raising allegations similar to those presented in the west virginia amended
complaint are also pending in ohio state court against tpc and spc, in texas
state court against tpc and spc, and in louisiana state court against tpc (the
claims asserted in these suits, together with the west virginia suit, are
collectively referred to as the common law claims).
all of the actions against tpc described in the
preceding paragraph, other than the hawaii actions, had been subject to a
temporary restraining order entered by the federal bankruptcy court in new york
that had previously presided over and approved the reorganization in bankruptcy
of tpcs former policyholder johns-manville corporation and affiliated
entities. in august2002, the bankruptcy court held a hearing on tpcs
motion for a preliminary injunction prohibiting further prosecution of the
lawsuits pursuant to the reorganization plan and related orders. at the
conclusion of this hearing, the court ordered the parties to mediation,
appointed a mediator and continued the temporary restraining order. during
2003, the same bankruptcy court extended the existing injunction to apply to an
additional set of cases filed in various state courts in texas and ohio as well
as to the attorneys who are prosecuting these cases. the order also enjoined
these attorneys and their respective law firms from commencing any further
lawsuits against tpc based upon these allegations without the prior approval of
the court. notwithstanding the injunction, additional common law claims were
filed and served on tpc.
on november19, 2003, the parties advised the
bankruptcy court that a settlement of the statutory and hawaii actions had been
reached. this settlement includes a lump sum payment of up to $412 million by
tpc, subject to a number of significant contingencies. after continued meetings
with the mediator, the parties advised the bankruptcy court on may25,
2004 that a settlement resolving substantially all pending and similar future
common law claims against tpc had also been reached. this settlement requires a
payment of up to $90 million by tpc, subject to a number of significant
contingencies. each of these settlements is contingent upon, among other
things, an order of the bankruptcy court clarifying that all of these claims,
and similar future asbestos-related claims against tpc, are barred by prior
orders entered by the bankruptcy court in connection with the original
johns-manville bankruptcy proceedings.
on august17, 2004, the bankruptcy court
entered an order approving the settlements and clarifying its prior orders that
all of the pending statutory and hawaii actions and substantially all common
law claims pending against tpc are barred. the order also applies to similar
direct action claims that may be filed in the future.
four appeals were taken from the august17,
2004 ruling. these appeals have been consolidated and are currently pending. the
parties have completed briefing all of the issues and a hearing was held before
the district court on february22, 2006. the company has no obligation to
pay any of the settlement amounts unless and until the orders and relief become
final and are not subject to any further appellate review. it is not possible
to predict how appellate courts will ruleon the pending appeals.
spc, which is not covered by the bankruptcy court
rulings or the settlements described above, has numerous defenses in all of the
direct action cases asserting common law claims that are pending against it. spcs
defenses include the fact that these novel theories have no basis in law; that
they are directly at odds with the well-established law pertaining to the
insured/insurer relationship; that there is no generalized duty to warn as
alleged by the plaintiffs; and that the applicable statute of limitations as to
many of these claims has long since expired. many of these defenses have been
raised in initial motions to dismiss filed by spc and other insurers. there
have been favorable rulings during 2003 and 2004 in texas and during 2004 and
2005 in ohio on some of these motions filed by spc and other insurers that
dealt with statute of limitations and the validity of the alleged causes of
actions. on may26, 2005, the court of appeals of ohio, eighth district,
affirmed the earliest of these favorable rulings. in texas, only one court, in juneof
2005, has denied the insurers initial challenges to the pleadings. that ruling
was contrary to the rulings by other courts in similar cases, and spc intends
to continue to defend this case vigorously.
the company is defending its asbestos and
environmental-related litigation vigorously and believes that it has
meritorious defenses; however, the outcome of these disputes is uncertain. in
this regard, the company employs dedicated specialists and aggressive
resolution strategies to manage asbestos and environmental loss exposure,
including settling litigation under appropriate circumstances. for a discussion
of other information regarding the companys asbestos and environmental
exposure, see item 2  managements discussion and analysis of financial
condition and results of operations  asbestos claims and litigation,
environmental claims and litigation and  uncertainty regarding adequacy of
asbestos and environmental reserves.
currently, it is not possible to predict legal
outcomes and their impact on the future development of claims and litigation
relating to asbestos and environmental claims. any such development will be
affected by future court decisions and interpretations, as well as changes in
applicable legislation. because of these uncertainties, additional liabilities
may arise for amounts in excess of the current related reserves. in addition,
the companys estimate of ultimate claims and claim adjustment expenses may
change. these additional liabilities or increases in estimates, or a range of
either, cannot now be reasonably estimated and could result in income statement
charges that could be material to the companys results of operations and
financial condition in future periods.
shareholder
litigation and related proceedings
tpc and its board of directors were named as
defendants in three putative class action lawsuits brought by shareholders
alleging breach of fiduciary duty in connection with the merger of tpc and spc
and seeking injunctive relief as well as unspecified monetary damages.
the actions were captioned henzel, et al. v.
travelers property casualty corp., et al. (jud. dist. of waterbury,
ct. nov.17, 2003); vozzolo v.
travelers property casualty corp., et al. (jud. dist. of waterbury,
ct. nov.17, 2003); and farina v.
travelers property casualty corp., et al. (jud. dist. of waterbury,
ct. december15, 2003). the
farina complaint also named spc and its former subsidiary, adams
acquisition corp., as defendants, alleging that they aided and abetted the
alleged breach of fiduciary duty. on march18, 2004, tpc and spc
announced that all of these lawsuits had been settled, subject to court
approval. before court approval of the settlement, additional shareholder
litigation was commenced, as described below. on september12, 2005,
plaintiffs voluntarily withdrew their complaints without prejudice.
beginning in august2004, following post-merger
announcements by the company, various shareholders of the company commenced
fourteen putative class action lawsuits against the company and certain of its
current and former officers and directors in the united states district court
for the district of minnesota. plaintiff shareholders alleged that certain
disclosures relating to the april2004 merger between tpc and spc
contained false or misleading statements with respect to the value of spcs
loss reserves in violation of federal securities laws. these actions were
consolidated under the caption in re st.
paul travelers securities litigation i, and a lead plaintiff and
lead counsel were appointed. an additional putative class action based on
the same allegations was brought in new york state supreme court. this
action was subsequently transferred to the district of minnesota and was
consolidated with in re st. paul travelers
securities litigation i. on june24, 2005, the lead
plaintiff filed an amended consolidated complaint. the complaint did not
specify damages. on august23, 2005, the company and the other defendants
in in re
st. paul travelers securities litigation i moved to dismiss the
amended consolidated complaint. on november22, 2005, the parties reached an agreement to settle
the case. the settlement also encompasses the henzel,
vozzolo and farina
cases described above. on december28,
2005, the court approved the settlement.
three other actions against the company and certain
of its current and former officers and directors are pending in the united
states district court for the district of minnesota. two of these
actions, which were originally captioned
kahn v. the st. paul travelers companies,inc., et al. (nov.2,
2004) and michael a. bernstein profit
sharing plan v. the st. paul travelers companies,inc., et al.
(nov.10, 2004), are putative class actions brought by certain
shareholders of the company against the company and certain of its current and
former officers and directors. these actions have been consolidated as in re st. paul travelers securities litigation ii,
and a lead plaintiff and lead counsel have been appointed. on july11,
2005, the lead plaintiff filed an amended consolidated complaint. the amended
consolidated complaint alleges violations of federal securities laws in
connection with the companys alleged failure to make disclosure relating to
the practice of paying brokers commissions on a contingent basis, the companys
alleged involvement in a conspiracy to rig bids and the companys allegedly
improper use of finite reinsurance products. on september26, 2005, the
company and the other defendants in in re st. paul travelers securities litigation
ii moved to dismiss the amended consolidated complaint for failure
to state a claim. in the third of these actions, an alleged beneficiary of the
companys 401(k) savings plan commenced a putative class action against the
company and certain of its current and former officers and directors captioned spiziri v. the st. paul travelers companies,inc.,
et al. (dec.28, 2004). the complaint alleges violations
of the employee retirement income security act based on allegations similar to
those in in re st. paul travelers securities
litigation i. on june1, 2005, the company and the other
defendants in spiziri moved to
dismiss the complaint. on january4,
2006, the parties in spiziri entered
into a stipulation of settlement. the settlement remains subject to court
approval.
in addition, two derivative actions have been
brought in the united states district court for the district of minnesota
against all of the companys current directors and certain of the companys
former directors, naming the company as a nominal defendant: rowe v. fishman, et al. (oct.22,
2004) and clark v. fishman, et al.
(nov.18, 2004). the derivative actions have been consolidated for
pretrial proceedings as rowe, et al. v.
fishman, et al. and a consolidated derivative complaint has been
filed. the consolidated derivative complaint asserts state law claims,
including breach of fiduciary duty, based on allegations similar to those
alleged in in re st. paul travelers
securities litigation i and ii described above. on june10,
2005, the company and the other defendants in
rowe moved to dismiss the complaint. oral argument on the motion to
dismiss was presented on september19, 2005.
the company believes that the pending lawsuits have
no merit and intends to defend vigorously; however, the company is not able to
provide any assurance that the financial impact of one or more of these
proceedings will not be material to the companys results of operations in a
future period. the company is obligated to indemnify its officers and directors
to the extent provided under minnesota law. as part of that obligation, the
company will advance officers and directors attorneys fees and other expenses
they incur in defending these lawsuits.
other
proceedings
from time to time the company is involved in
proceedings addressing disputes with its reinsurers regarding the collection of
amounts due under the companys reinsurance agreements. these proceedings may
be initiated by the company or the reinsurers and may involve the terms of the
reinsurance agreements, the coverage of particular claims, exclusions under the
agreements, as well as counterclaims for rescission of the agreements. one of
these disputes is the action described in the following paragraph.
the companys gulf operation brought an action on may22,
2003, as amended on may12, 2004, in the supreme court of new york, county
of new york (gulf insurance company v.
transatlantic reinsurance company, et al.), against transatlantic
reinsurance company (transatlantic), xl reinsurance america,inc. (xl),
odyssey america reinsurance corporation (odyssey), employers reinsurance
company (employers) and gerling global reinsurance corporation of america
(gerling), to recover amounts due under reinsurance contracts issued to gulf
and related to gulfs february2003 settlement of a coverage dispute under
a vehicle residual value protection insurance policy. the reinsurers have
asserted counterclaims seeking rescission of the vehicle residual value
reinsurance contracts issued to gulf and unspecified damages for breach of
contract. separate actions filed by transatlantic and gerling have been
consolidated with the original gulf action for pre-trial purposes. on october1,
2003, gulf entered into a final settlement agreement with employers, and all
claims and counterclaims with respect to employers have been dismissed.
on may26, 2004, the court denied gulfs motion
to dismiss certain claims asserted by transatlantic and a joint motion by
transatlantic, xl and odyssey for summary judgment against gulf. discovery is
currently proceeding in the matters. gulf denies the reinsurers allegations,
believes that it has a strong legal basis to collect the amounts due under the
reinsurance contracts and intends to vigorously pursue the actions.
based on the companys beliefs about its legal
positions in its various reinsurance recovery proceedings, the company does not
expect any of these matters to have a material adverse effect on its results of
operations in a future period.
as part of ongoing, industry-wide investigations,
the company and its affiliates have received subpoenas and written requests for
information from government agencies and authorities. the areas of
inquiry addressed to the company include its relationship with brokers and
agents, the companys involvement with non-traditional insurance and
reinsurance products, branding requirements for salvage automobiles and the
reporting of workers compensation premiums. the company or its
affiliates have received subpoenas or written requests for information, in each
case with respect to one or more of the areas described above, from: (i)state
of california office of the attorney general; (ii)state of california
department of insurance; (iii)licensing and market conduct compliance
division, financial services commission of ontario, canada; (iv)state of
connecticut insurance department; (v)state of connecticut office of the
attorney general; (vi)state of delaware department of insurance; (vii)state
of florida department of financial services; (viii)state of florida
office of insurance regulation; (ix)state of florida department of legal
affairs office of the attorney general; (x) state of georgia office of the
commissioner of insurance; (xi)state of illinois department of financial
and professional regulation; (xii) state of iowa insurance division; (xiii)
state of maryland insurance administration; (xiv) commonwealth of massachusetts
office of the attorney general; (xv) state of minnesota department of commerce;
(xvi) state of minnesota office of the attorney general; (xvii) state of new
hampshire insurance department; (xviii) state of new york office of the attorney
general; (xix) state of new york insurance department; (xx) state of north
carolina department of insurance; (xxi) state of ohio office of the attorney
general; (xxii) state of ohio department of insurance; (xxiii) commonwealth of
pennsylvania office of the attorney general; (xxiv) state of texas department
of insurance; (xxv) state of washington office of the insurance commissioner;
(xxvi) state of west virginia office of attorney general; (xxvii) the united
states attorney for the southern district of new york; and (xxviii) the united
states securities and exchange commission. the company and its affiliates may
receive additional subpoenas and requests for information with respect to the
areas described above from other agencies or authorities.
the company is cooperating with these subpoenas and
requests for information. in addition, outside counsel, with the oversight of
the companys board of directors, has been conducting an internal review of certain
of the companys business practices. this review initially focused on the
companys relationship with brokers and was commenced after the announcement of
litigation brought by the new york attorney generals office against a major
broker.
the internal review was expanded to address the
various requests for information described above and to verify whether the
companys business practices in these areas have been appropriate. the companys
review has been extensive, involving the examination of e-mails and
underwriting files, as well as interviews of current and former employees. the
company also continues to receive and respond to additional requests for
information and will expand its review accordingly.
to date, the company has found only a few instances
of conduct that were inconsistent with the companys employee code of conduct. the
company has responded, and will continue to respond, appropriately to any such
conduct.
the companys internal review with respect to finite
reinsurance considered finite products the company both purchased and sold. the
company has completed its review with respect to the identified finite products
purchased and sold, and has concluded that no adjustment to previously issued
financial statements is required. the related industry-wide investigations
previously described are ongoing, as are the companys efforts to cooperate
with the authorities, and the various authorities could ask that additional
work be performed or reach conclusions different from the companys. accordingly,
it would be premature to reach any conclusions as to the likely outcome of
these matters.
six putative class action lawsuits and two
individual actions were brought against a number of insurance brokers and
insurers, including the company and/or certain of its affiliates, by plaintiffs
who allegedly purchased insurance products through one or more of the defendant
brokers. plaintiffs allege that various insurance brokers conspired with
each other and with various insurers, including the company and/or certain of
its affiliates, to artificially inflate premiums, allocate brokerage customers
and rig bids for insurance products offered to those customers. five of
the class actions were filed in federal district court, and the complaints are captioned: shell vacations llc v. marsh&
mclennan companies,inc., et al. (n.d. ill. jan.14,
2005), redwood oil company v. marsh&
mclennan companies,inc., et
al. (n.d. ill. jan.21, 2005),
boros v. marsh& mclennan companies,inc., et al.
(n.d. cal. feb.4, 2005), mulcahey v.
arthur j. gallagher& co., et al. (d.n.j. feb.23,
2005) and golden gate bridge, highway, and
transportation district v. marsh& mclennan companies,inc., et
al. (d.n.j. feb.23, 2005). the plaintiff in one of the
five actions, shell vacations llc,
later voluntarily dismissed its complaint. to the extent they were not
originally filed there, the federal class actions were transferred by the
judicial panel on multidistrict litigation to the united states district court
for the district of new jersey and have been consolidated with other class
actions under the caption in re insurance
brokerage antitrust litigation, a multidistrict litigation
proceeding in that district. on august1, 2005, nineteen plaintiffs,
including the four named plaintiffs in the above-referenced class actions,
filed an amended consolidated class action complaint naming various brokers and
insurers, including the company and certain of its affiliates, on behalf of a
putative nationwide class of policyholders. the complaint includes causes of
action under the sherman act, the racketeer influenced and corrupt
organizations act, state common law and the laws of the various states
prohibiting antitrust violations. plaintiffs seek monetary damages,
including punitive damages and trebled damages, permanent injunctive relief,
restitution, including disgorgement of profits, interest and costs, including
attorneys fees. on november29, 2005, all defendants moved to
dismiss the complaint for failure to state a claim. on february 13, 2006,
the named plaintiffs moved to certify a nationwide class consisting of all
persons who between august 26, 1994, and the date of class certification
engaged the services of a broker defendant (or related entity) in connection
with the procurement or renewal of insurance and who entered into or renewed a
contract of insurance with one or more of the insurer defendants, including the
company. one individual
action naming various brokers and insurers, including several of
the companys affiliates, was filed in federal district court and is captioned delta pride catfish, inc. v. marsh usa, inc., et al. (d.
miss. sept. 13, 2005). that action has
also been transferred to the district of new jersey and is being coordinated
with in re insurance brokerage antitrust litigation. on january 17, 2006, all defendants moved to
dismiss the complaint in delta pride catfish, inc. for
failure to state a claim. one other
putative class action, bensley construction,inc.
v. marsh& mclennan companies,inc., et al. (mass.
super. ct. may16, 2005), and one other individual action, office depot,inc. v. marsh& mclennan
companies,inc., et al. (fla. cir. ct. june22, 2005),
have been filed in state court and assert claims that are similar to those
asserted in in re insurance brokerage antitrust litigation
against various brokers and insurers, including the company and/or certain of
its affiliates, but have not been consolidated with in re
insurance brokerage antitrust litigation. certain defendants in bensley construction,inc., including the company, have removed
the action to the united states district court for the district of
massachusetts. on february 13, 2006, the
action was transferred to the district of new jersey for coordination with in re insurance brokerage antitrust litigation. office depot, inc.
was brought in florida state court and names several of the companys
subsidiaries. on november 9, 2005, the
court entered an order staying office depot
pending resolution of in re insurance brokerage
antitrust litigation. the
plaintiff in office depot, inc. has
appealed. the company believes that
these lawsuits have no merit and intends to defend vigorously.
in addition to those described above, the company
is involved in numerous lawsuits, not involving asbestos and environmental
claims, arising mostly in the ordinary course of business operations either as
a liability insurer defending third-party claims brought against policyholders,
or as an insurer defending claims brought against it relating to coverage or
the companys business practices. while the ultimate resolution of these
legal proceedings could be material to the companys results of operations in a
future period, in the opinion of the companys management none would likely
have a material adverse effect on the companys financial condition or
liquidity.
on july23, 2004, the company announced that it
was seeking guidance from the staff of the division of corporation finance of
the securities exchange commission with respect to the appropriate purchase
accounting treatment for certain second quarter 2004 adjustments totaling $1.63
billion ($1.07 billion after-tax). the company recorded these adjustments as
charges in its income statement in the second quarter of 2004. through an
informal comment process, the staff of the division of corporation finance has
subsequently asked for further information, which the company has provided.
specifically, the staff has asked for information concerning the companys
adjustments to certain of spcs insurance reserves and reserves for reinsurance
recoverables and premiums due from policyholders, and how those adjustments may
relate to spcs reserves for periods prior to the merger. after reviewing the
staffs questions and comments, the company continues to believe that its
accounting treatment for these adjustments is appropriate. if, however, the
staff disagrees, some or all of the adjustments being discussed may not be
recorded as charges in the companys income statement, thereby increasing net
income for the second quarter and full year 2004 and increasing shareholders
equity at december31, 2005 and 2004, in each case by the approximate
after-tax amount of the change. the effect on tangible shareholders equity
(adjusted for the effects of deferred taxes associated with goodwill and
intangible assets) at december31, 2005 and 2004 would not be material.
increases to goodwill and deferred tax liabilities would be reflected on the
companys balance sheet as of april1, 2004, either due to purchase
accounting or adjustment of spcs reserves prior to the merger.
other commitments and guarantees
commitments
investment commitmentsthe company has long-term commitments to
fund venture capital investments through its subsidiary, st. paul venture
capital vi, llc, through new and existing partnerships and certain other
venture capital entities. the companys total future estimated obligations
related to its venture capital investments were $128 million and $289 million
at december31, 2005 and 2004, respectively. the company also has unfunded
commitments to partnerships, joint ventures and certain private equity
investments in which it invests. these additional commitments were $803 million
and $483 million at december31, 2005 and 2004, respectively.
spcs sale of minetin may1997, spc completed the sale of
its insurance brokerage operation, minet, to aon corporation. spc agreed to
indemnify aon against any future claims for professional liability and other
specified events that occurred or existed prior to the sale. the company
assumed obligations related to this indemnification upon consummation of the
merger. the company monitors its exposure under these claims on a regular
basis. the company believes reserves for reported claims are adequate, but it
does not have information on unreported claims to estimate a range of
additional liability. from 1997 to 2004, spc purchased insurance to cover a
portion of its exposure to such claims. under the sale agreement, spc also
committed to acquire a minimum level of reinsurance brokerage services from aon
through 2012. that commitment requires the company to make a contractual
payment to aon to the extent such minimum level of service is not acquired. the
maximum annual amount payable to aon for such services and any such contractual
payment related to that commitment is $20 million. spc also had commitments
under lease agreements through 2015 for vacated space (included in lease
commitment totals in note 15), as well as a commitment to make payments to a
former minet executive. the company assumed all obligations to these
commitments upon consummation of the merger.
guarantees
the company has certain contingent obligations for
guarantees related to agency loans and letters of credit, issuance of debt
securities, third party loans related to venture capital investments and
various indemnifications related to the sale of business entities.
in the ordinary course of selling business entities
to third parties, the company has agreed to indemnify purchasers for losses
arising out of breaches of representations and warranties with respect to the
business entities being sold, covenants and obligations of the company and/or
its subsidiaries following the close, and in certain cases obligations arising
from undisclosed liabilities, adverse reserve development or certain named
litigation. such indemnification provisions generally survive for periods
ranging from 12 months following the applicable closing date to the expiration
of the relevant statutes of limitations, or in some cases agreed upon term
limitations. as of december31, 2005, the aggregate amount of the companys
obligation for those indemnifications that are quantifiable related to sales of
business entities was $1.82 billion. certain of these contingent obligations
are subject to deductibles which have to be incurred by the obligee before the
company is obligated to make payments. included in the indemnification obligations
at december31, 2005 was $172 million related to the companys variable
interest in camperdown uk limited, which spc sold in december2003. the
companys variable interest results from an agreement to indemnify the
purchaser in the event a specified reserve deficiency develops, a
reserve-related foreign exchange impact occurs, or a foreign tax adjustment is
imposed on a pre-sale reporting period. the fair value of this obligation as of
december31, 2005 was $66 million, which was included in other liabilities
on the companys consolidated balance sheet.
18. related party transactions
prior to citigroups distribution to its
stockholders of a portion of its ownership in tpc in august2002, tpc
provided and purchased services to and from citigroup affiliated companies,
including facilities management, banking and financial functions, benefit
coverages, data processing services, and short-term investment pool management
services. charges for these shared services were allocated at cost. in
connection with the citigroup distribution, tpc and citigroup and its
affiliates entered into a transition services agreement for the provision of
certain of these services, tradename and trademark and similar agreements
related to the use of trademarks, logos and tradenames and an amendment to the march26,
2002 intercompany agreement with citigroup. during the first quarter of 2002,
citigroup provided investment advisory services on an allocated cost basis,
consistent with prior years. on august6, 2002, tpc entered into an
investment management agreement, which was applied retroactively to april1,
2002, with an affiliate of citigroup whereby the affiliate of citigroup
provided investment advisory and administrative services to tpc with respect to
its entire investment portfolio for a period of two years and at fees mutually
agreed upon, including a component based on investment performance. this
agreement was modified and extended through the first quarter of 2005, at which
time it was terminated. charges incurred related to this agreement were $2
million, $58 million and $60 million for the years ended december31,
2005, 2004 and 2003, respectively. tpc and citigroup also agreed upon the
allocation or transfer of certain other liabilities and assets, and rights and
obligations in furtherance of the separation of operations and ownership as a
result of the citigroup distribution. the net effect of these allocations and
transfers, in the opinion of management, was not significant to the companys
results of operations or financial condition.
the company had notes payable to citigroup of $700
million at december31, 2002, which was repaid during 2003. interest
expense included in the consolidated statement of income was $9 million for the
year ended december31, 2003.
in the ordinary course of business, the company
purchases and sells securities through formerly affiliated broker-dealers.
these transactions are conducted on an arms-length basis. commissions are not
paid for the purchase and sale of debt securities.
the company participates in reinsurance agreements
with tic, a former affiliate.
the company purchased annuities from former
affiliates to settle certain claims. through 2004, the company had agreed to
use tic as the most preferred provider of annuities, as long as citigroup
maintained competitive ratings and its products are competitively priced.
beginning in 2005, the company had no preferred provider of annuities. reinsurance
recoverables at december31, 2005 and 2004 included $791 million and $718
million, respectively, related to these annuities.
19. restructuring activities
during the second quarter of 2004, the companys
management approved and committed to plans to terminate and relocate certain
employees and to exit certain activities. the cost of these actions has been
recognized as a liability and is included in either the allocation of the
purchase price or recorded as part of general and administrative expenses. the
following table summarizes the companys costs related to these plans.
(in millions)
original
accruedcosts
balanceat
december31,
balanceat
december31,
payments
adjustments
payments
adjustments
restructuring costs included in the
allocation of the purchase price:
employee termination and relocation costs
$
$
(43
)
$
(3
)
$
$
(23
)
$
$
costs to exit leases
(1
)
(3
)
(1
)
other exit costs
(2
)
(2
)
total included in the allocation of
purchase price
(46
)
(28
)
employee termination costs included in
general and administrative expenses:
commercial
(4
)
(9
)
(13
)
specialty
(1
)
(2
)
personal
(1
)
(2
)
total included in general and
administrative expenses
(5
)
(10
)
(17
)
total restructuring costs
$
$
(51
)
$
(8
)
$
$
(45
)
$
$
20. noncash investing and
financing activities
remarketing of senior notes
in july2002, concurrent with the
issuance of 17.8 million of spc common shares in a public offering, spc issued
8.9 million equity units, each having a stated amount of $50, for gross
consideration of $442 million. each equity unit initially consisted of a
forward purchase contract for the companys common stock, which matured in august2005,
and an unsecured $50 senior note of the company (maturing in 2007). total
annual distributions on the equity units were at the rate of 9.00%, consisting
of interest on the note at a rate of 5.25% and fee payments under the forward
contract of 3.75%. holders of the equity units had the opportunity to
participate in a required remarketing of the senior note component. the initial
remarketing date was may11, 2005. on that date, the notes were
successfully remarketed, and the interest rate on the notes was reset to 5.01%,
from 5.25%, effective may16, 2005. the remarketed notes mature on august16,
2007. there were no other significant noncash financing or investing activities
during the year ended december31, 2005.
there were no significant noncash financing or
investing activities during the years ended december31, 2004 and 2003,
other than the acquisition of spc in 2004 (see note 2).
21. consolidating financial
statements of the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries
the following consolidating financial statements of
the company have been prepared pursuant to rule3-10 of regulation s-x.
these consolidating financial statements have been prepared from the companys
financial information on the same basis of accounting as the consolidated
financial statements. the st. paul travelers companies,inc. has fully and
unconditionally guaranteed certain debt obligations of tpc, its wholly-owned
subsidiary, which totaled $2.64 billion as of december31, 2005.
prior to the merger, tpc fully and unconditionally
guaranteed the payment of all principal, premiums, if any, and interest on
certain debt obligations of its wholly-owned subsidiary tighi. the st. paul
travelers companies,inc. has fully and unconditionally guaranteed such
guarantee obligations of tpc. tpc is deemed to have no assets or operations
independent of tighi. consolidating financial information for tighi has not
been presented herein because such financial information would be substantially
the same as the financial information provided for tpc.
the amounts shown in the tpc and other
subsidiaries columns in the following consolidating financial statements are
not directly comparable between 2005 and 2004. during 2005, the company
combined the previously separate st. paul insurance group and travelers
property casualty reinsurance pools, forming the new st. paul travelers
reinsurance pool effective july1, 2005, retroactive to january1,
2005. as a result, the tpc and other subsidiaries columns of the
consolidating financial statements for 2005 reflect the impact of allocations
of revenues, losses and expenses made pursuant to the respective entities
participation level in the newly combined pool.
consolidating
statement of income (unaudited)
for the year ended december31,
(in millions)
tpc
other
subsidiaries
st. paul
travelers(1)
eliminations
consolidated
revenues
premiums
$
13,494
$
6,847
$
$
$
20,341
net investment income
2,191
3,165
fee income
net realized investment gains (losses)
(21
)
other revenues
(11
)
total revenues
16,547
7,794
(11
)
24,365
claims
and expenses
claims and claim adjustment expenses
9,835
5,092
14,927
amortization of deferred acquisition costs
2,038
1,214
3,252
general and administrative expenses
2,198
1,010
(11
)
3,229
interest expense
(2
)
total claims and expenses
14,213
7,314
(11
)
21,694
income (loss) from continuing operations
before income taxes
2,334
(143
)
2,671
income tax expense (benefit)
(27
)
equity in earnings of subsidiaries, net of
tax
2,215
(2,215
)
income (loss) from continuing operations
1,769
2,099
(2,215
)
2,061
discontinued
operations
operating loss, net of taxes
(82
)
(581
)
(663
)
gain on disposal, net of taxes
income (loss) from discontinued operations
(477
)
(439
)
net
income
$
1,769
$
$
1,622
$
(2,215
)
$
1,622
(1) the st. paul travelers companies,inc.,
excluding its subsidiaries.
consolidating
statement of income (unaudited)
for the year ended december31,
(in millions)
tpc
other
subsidiaries
st. paul
travelers(1)
eliminations
consolidated
revenues
premiums
$
13,682
$
5,356
$
$
$
19,038
net investment income
2,063
2,663
fee income
net realized investment gains (losses)
(139
)
(75
)
(39
)
other revenues
(10
)
total revenues
16,732
5,888
(66
)
(10
)
22,544
claims and expenses
claims and claim adjustment expenses
9,266
6,173
15,439
amortization of deferred acquisition costs
2,188
2,978
general and administrative expenses
1,955
(4
)
2,945
interest expense
(6
)
total claims and expenses
13,552
7,905
(10
)
21,598
income (loss) from continuing operations
before income taxes
3,180
(2,017
)
(217
)
income tax expense (benefit)
(715
)
(72
)
equity in earnings (loss) of subsidiaries,
net of tax
(1
)
1,027
(1,026
)
minority interest, net of tax
income
(loss) from continuing operations
2,314
(1,303
)
(1,026
)
discontinued
operations
operating income, net of taxes
gain on disposal, net of taxes
income from
discontinued operations
net
income (loss)
$
2,314
$
(1,288
)
$
$
(1,026
)
$
(1) the st. paul travelers companies,inc.,
excluding its subsidiaries.
consolidating
balance sheet (unaudited)
at december31, 2005
(in millions)
tpc
other
subsidiaries
st. paul
travelers(1)
eliminations
consolidated
assets
fixed maturities, available for sale at
fair value (including $2,667 subject to securities lending and repurchase
agreements) (amortized cost $58,616)
$
37,582
$
20,957
$
$
$
58,983
equity securities, at fair value (cost
$538)
real estate
mortgage loans
short-term securities
2,142
1,551
1,109
4,802
other investments
1,701
1,235
3,026
total investments
41,974
24,612
1,701
68,287
cash
investment income accrued
(3
)
premiums receivable
3,843
2,281
6,124
reinsurance recoverables
14,966
4,608
19,574
ceded unearned premiums
1,000
1,322
deferred acquisition costs
1,218
1,527
deferred tax asset
1,330
2,062
contractholder receivables
4,422
1,094
5,516
goodwill
2,412
1,030
3,442
intangible assets
investment in subsidiaries
23,708
(23,708
)
other assets
2,292
(195
)
3,318
total assets
$
74,380
$
36,667
$
26,046
$
(23,906
)
$
113,187
liabilities
claims and claim adjustment expense
reserves
$
41,213
$
19,877
$
$
$
61,090
unearned premium reserves
7,418
3,509
10,927
contractholder payables
4,422
1,094
5,516
payables for reinsurance premiums
debt
2,623
3,272
(192
)
5,850
other liabilities
4,297
2,017
(4
)
6,781
total liabilities
60,255
27,082
3,743
(196
)
90,884
shareholders
equity
preferred
stock:
savings planconvertible preferred stock
(0.5 shares issued and outstanding)
common stock (1,750.0 shares authorized;
694.6 shares issued; 693.4 shares outstanding)
18,179
(745
)
18,179
additional paid-in capital
9,916
7,724
(17,640
)
retained earnings
3,835
1,154
3,750
(4,989
)
3,750
accumulated other changes in equity from
nonowner sources
(38
)
(360
)
treasury stock, at cost (1.2 shares)
(47
)
(47
)
unearned compensation
(24
)
(83
)
(83
)
total shareholders equity
14,125
9,585
22,303
(23,710
)
22,303
total liabilities and shareholders equity
$
74,380
$
36,667
$
26,046
$
(23,906
)
$
113,187
(1) the st. paul travelers companies,inc.,
excluding its subsidiaries.
consolidating
balance sheet (unaudited)
at december31, 2004
(in millions)
tpc
other
subsidiaries
st. paul
travelers(1)
eliminations
consolidated
assets
fixed maturities, available for sale at
fair value (including $2,603 subject to securities lending and repurchase
agreements) (amortized cost $53,017)
$
34,347
$
19,895
$
$
(5
)
$
54,269
equity securities, at fair value (cost
$687)
real estate
mortgage loans
short-term securities
2,695
2,122
4,944
other investments
2,151
1,220
3,432
total investments
39,944
24,134
(5
)
64,368
cash
investment income accrued
(3
)
premiums receivable
4,115
2,086
6,201
reinsurance recoverables
11,058
7,996
19,054
ceded unearned premiums
1,565
deferred acquisition costs
1,033
1,559
deferred tax asset
(171
)
2,198
contractholder receivables
3,986
1,643
5,629
goodwill
2,412
1,152
3,564
intangible assets
1,062
net assets of discontinued operations
1,696
2,041
investment in subsidiaries
22,042
(22,042
)
other assets
1,698
1,743
(730
)
3,072
total assets
$
66,818
$
42,369
$
25,010
$
(22,951
)
$
111,246
liabilities
claims and
claim adjustment expense reserves
$
35,796
$
23,274
$
$
$
59,070
unearned
premium reserves
7,162
4,148
11,310
contractholder
payables
3,986
1,643
5,629
payables for
reinsurance premiums
debt
2,624
3,809
(303
)
6,313
other
liabilities
4,784
2,445
(402
)
6,827
total liabilities
54,554
32,387
3,809
(705
)
90,045
shareholders
equity
preferred
stock:
savings planconvertible preferred stock
(0.6 shares issued and outstanding)
(29
)
guaranteed obligationstock ownership plan
(5
)
(5
)
common stock (1,750.0 shares authorized;
670.7 shares issued; 670.3 shares outstanding)
17,414
(756
)
17,414
additional paid-in capital
8,694
7,921
(16,615
)
retained earnings
2,774
1,235
2,744
(4,009
)
2,744
accumulated other changes in equity from
nonowner sources
(948
)
treasury stock, at cost (0.4 shares)
(14
)
(14
)
(14
)
unearned compensation
(58
)
(83
)
(83
)
minority interest
(1
)
(38
)
total shareholders equity
12,264
9,982
21,201
(22,246
)
21,201
total liabilities and shareholders equity
$
66,818
$
42,369
$
25,010
$
(22,951
)
$
111,246
(1) the st. paul travelers companies,inc.,
excluding its subsidiaries.
consolidating
statement of cash flows (unaudited)
for the year ended december31,
2005 (1)
(in millions)
tpc
other
subsidiaries
st. paul
travelers(2)
eliminations
consolidated
cash
flows from operating activities
net income (loss)
$
1,769
$
$
1,622
$
(2,215
)
$
1,622
net adjustments to reconcile net income to
net cash provided by operating activities
(1,416
)
2,215
1,967
net cash provided by operating activities
of continuing operations
2,628
3,589
net cash provided by operating activities
of discontinued operations
net cash provided by operating activities
2,628
3,613
cash flows from investing activities
proceeds
from maturities of investments:
fixed maturities
2,944
1,996
4,952
mortgage loans
proceeds
from sales of investments:
fixed maturities
3,095
1,918
5,192
equity securities
mortgage loans
real estate
purchases of
investments:
fixed maturities
(9,417
)
(5,618
)
(1,011
)
(16,046
)
equity securities
(9
)
(54
)
(63
)
mortgage loans
real estate
(7
)
(42
)
(49
)
short-term securities, (purchases) sales,
net
(982
)
other investments, net
securities transactions in course of
settlement
(583
)
(12
)
(595
)
net proceeds from sale of discontinued
operations
1,994
2,399
other
(128
)
(4
)
(132
)
net cash provided by (used in) by investing
activities of continuing operations
(2,618
)
(610
)
(3,036
)
net cash used in investing activities of
discontinued operations
(20
)
(20
)
net cash provided by (used in) investing
activities
(2,618
)
(630
)
(3,056
)
cash
flows from financing activities
issuance of
debt
payment of
debt
(4
)
(811
)
(815
)
issuance of common stock - maturity of
equity unit forward contracts
dividends to shareholders
(628
)
(628
)
issuance of common stock-employee stock
options
treasury stock acquired-net employee
stock-based compensation
(33
)
(33
)
dividends received by (paid to) parent
company
(860
)
(85
)
capital contributions and loans between
subsidiaries
(890
)
other
(3
)
(3
)
net cash used in financing activities of
continuing operations
(40
)
(19
)
(414
)
(473
)
net cash used in financing activities of
discontinued operations
net cash used in financing activities
(40
)
(15
)
(414
)
(469
)
effect of exchange rate changes on cash
(5
)
(5
)
elimination of cash provided by
discontinued operations
(8
)
(8
)
net increase (decrease) in cash
(30
)
(16
)
cash at beginning of period
cash at end of period
$
$
$
$
$
supplemental disclosure of cash flow
information
income taxes paid (received)
$
$
$
(310
)
$
$
interest paid
$
$
$
$
$
(1) see note 3.
(2) the st. paul travelers companies,inc.,
excluding its subsidiaries.
consolidating
statement of cash flows (unaudited)
for the year ended december31,
2004 (1)
(in millions)
tpc
other
subsidiaries
st. paul
travelers(2)
eliminations
consolidated
cash flows from operating activities
net income (loss)
$
2,314
$
(1,288
)
$
$
(1,026
)
$
net adjustments to reconcile net income to
net cash provided by operating activities
1,608
2,943
(1,465
)
1,025
4,111
net cash provided by operating activities
of continuing operations
3,922
1,655
(510
)
(1
)
5,066
net cash provided by operating activities
of discontinued operations
net cash provided by (used in) operating
activities
3,922
1,830
(510
)
(1
)
5,241
cash
flows from investing activities
proceeds
from maturities of investments:
fixed maturities
3,947
1,673
5,621
mortgage loans
proceeds
from sales of investments:
fixed maturities
4,381
3,564
7,945
equity securities
mortgage loans
purchases of
investments:
fixed maturities
(9,863
)
(6,659
)
(16,522
)
equity securities
(55
)
(38
)
(1
)
(94
)
mortgage loans
(55
)
(55
)
real estate
(22
)
(22
)
short-term securities, (purchases) sales,
net
(556
)
(1,271
)
(87
)
(1,913
)
other investments, net
securities transactions in course of
settlement
(877
)
(231
)
(1,108
)
net cash acquired in merger
(19
)
other
net cash used in investing activities of
continuing operations
(2,228
)
(2,393
)
(27
)
(4,647
)
net cash used in investing activities of
discontinued operations
(139
)
(139
)
net cash
used in investing activities
(2,228
)
(2,532
)
(27
)
(4,786
)
cash
flows from financing activities
issuance of debt
payment of debt
(54
)
(173
)
(227
)
issuance of common stock-employee stock
options
treasury stock acquired-net employee
stock-based compensation
(22
)
(1
)
(23
)
dividends received by (paid to) parent
company
(1,690
)
(150
)
1,840
capital contributions and loans between
subsidiaries
(940
)
dividends to shareholders
(81
)
(561
)
(642
)
repurchase
of minority interest of subsidiary
(76
)
(76
)
other
net cash provided by (used in) financing
activities of continuing operations
(1,880
)
(516
)
net cash used in financing activities of
discontinued operations
(24
)
(24
)
net cash provided by (used in) financing
activities
(1,880
)
(540
)
effect of exchange rate changes on cash
elimination of cash provided by
discontinued operations
(12
)
(12
)
net increase (decrease) in cash
(186
)
(90
)
cash at beginning of period
cash at end of period
$
$
$
$
$
supplemental disclosure of cash flow
information
income taxes paid (received)
$
$
$
(219
)
$
$
interest paid
$
$
$
$
$
(1) see note 3.
(2) the st. paul travelers companies,inc.,
excluding its subsidiaries.
22. selected quarterly financial
data (unaudited)
2005 (in millions, except per share data)
first
quarter
second
quarter
third
quarter
fourth
quarter
total
total revenues
$
6,105
$
6,037
$
6,042
$
6,181
$
24,365
total expenses
4,917
4,743
6,050
5,984
21,694
income (loss) from continuing operations
before income taxes
1,188
1,294
(8
)
2,671
income tax expense (benefit)
(83
)
income from continuing operations
2,061
income (loss) from discontinued operations
(665
)
(439
)
net income
$
$
1,069
$
$
$
1,622
net income per share:(1)
basic
$
0.31
$
1.59
$
0.24
$
0.26
$
2.39
diluted
0.31
1.52
0.23
0.26
2.33
2004 (in millions, except per share data)
first
quarter
second
quarter
third
quarter
fourth
quarter
total
total revenues
$
4,127
$
6,060
$
6,129
$
6,228
$
22,544
total expenses
3,310
6,601
5,765
5,922
21,598
income (loss) from continuing operations
before income taxes and minority interest
(541
)
income tax expense (benefit)
(239
)
minority interest, net of tax
income (loss) from continuing operations
(302
)
income from discontinued operations
net income (loss)
$
$
(275
)
$
$
$
net income
(loss) per share:(1)
basic
$
1.35
$
(0.42
)
$
0.51
$
0.45
$
1.56
diluted
1.31
(0.42
)
0.50
0.44
1.53
(1) due to the averaging of shares, quarterly earnings per share may not
add to the total for the full year. historical earnings per share data for the
first quarter of 2004 were restated to reflect the impact of the merger with
spc.
item9. changes in and disagreements
with accountants on accounting and financial disclosure
not applicable.
item9a. controls and procedures
the company maintains disclosure controls and procedures
(as that term is defined in rules13a-15(e)and 15d-15(e)under
the securities exchange act of 1934, as amended (exchange act)) that are
designed to ensure that information required to be disclosed in the companys
reports under the exchange act is recorded, processed, summarized and reported
within the time periods specified in the securities and exchange commissions rulesand
forms, and that such information is accumulated and communicated to the companys
management, including its chief executive officer and chief financial officer,
as appropriate, to allow timely decisions regarding required disclosures. any
controls and procedures, no matter how well designed and operated, can provide
only reasonable assurance of achieving the desired control objectives. as a
result of the merger of spc and tpc, the company made a number of significant
changes in its internal controls over financial reporting beginning in the
second quarter of 2004 and continuing through 2005. the changes involved
combining the financial reporting process and the attendant personnel and
system changes. the companys management, with the participation of the companys
chief executive officer and chief financial officer, has evaluated the
effectiveness of the design and operation of the companys disclosure controls
and procedures as of december31, 2005. based upon that evaluation and
subject to the foregoing, the companys chief executive officer and chief
financial officer concluded that the design and operation of the companys disclosure
controls and procedures provided reasonable assurance that the disclosure
controls and procedures are effective to accomplish their objectives.
in addition, except as described above, there was no
change in the companys internal control over financial reporting (as that term
is defined in rules13a-15(f)and 15d-15(f)under the exchange
act) that occurred during the quarter ended december31, 2005 that has
materially affected, or is reasonably likely to materially affect, the companys
internal control over financial reporting.
managements
report on internal control over financial reporting
management of the company is responsible for
establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over financial
reporting. the companys internal control over financial reporting is designed
to provide reasonable assurances regarding the reliability of financial
reporting and the preparation of the consolidated financial statements of the
company in accordance with u.s. generally accepted accounting principles. the
companys accounting policies and internal controls over financial reporting,
established and maintained by management, are under the general oversight of
the companys audit committee.
the companys internal control over financial
reporting includes those policies and procedures that:
pertain to the maintenance of records that,
in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and
dispositions of the assets of the company;
provide reasonable assurance that
transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial
statements in accordance with u.s. generally accepted accounting principles,
and that receipts and expenditures are being made only in accordance with
authorizations of the companys management and directors; and
provide reasonable assurance regarding
prevention or timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use or disposition
of assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements.
because of its inherent limitations, internal
control over financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. also,
projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are subject to
the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions,
or that the degree or compliance with the policies or procedures may
deteriorate.
management has assessed the companys internal
control over financial reporting as of december31, 2005. the standard
measures adopted by management in making its evaluation are the measures in the
internal-control integrated framework published by the committee of sponsoring
organizations of the treadway commission.
based upon its assessment, management has concluded
that the companys internal control over financial reporting is effective at december31,
2005, and that there were no material weaknesses in the companys internal
control over financial reporting as of that date.
kpmg llp, an independent registered public
accounting firm, which has audited and reported on the consolidated financial
statements contained in this form10-k, has issued its written attestation
report on managements assessment of the companys internal control over
financial reporting which follows this report.
report of independent registered public
accounting firm
the board of directors and stockholders
the st. paul travelers companies,inc.:
we have audited managements assessment, included in the accompanying managements report on internal control over
financial reporting, that
the st. paul travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries maintained
effective internal control over financial reporting as of december31,
2005, based on criteria established in
internal control - integrated framework issued by the committee of sponsoring
organizations of the treadway commission (coso). the st. paul travelers companies,inc. and
subsidiaries management is responsible for maintaining effective internal
control over financial reporting and for its assessment of the effectiveness of
internal control over financial reporting. our responsibility is to express an
opinion on managements assessment and an opinion on the effectiveness of the
companys internal control over financial reporting based on our audit.
we conducted our audit in accordance with the standards of the public
company accounting oversight board (united states). those standards require
that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether
effective internal control over financial reporting was maintained in all
material respects. our audit included obtaining an understanding of internal
control over financial reporting, evaluating managements assessment, testing
and evaluating the design and operating effectiveness of internal control, and
performing such other procedures as we considered necessary in the
circumstances. we believe that our audit provides a reasonable basis for our
opinion.
a companys internal control over financial reporting
is a process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability
of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external
purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. a companys
internal control over financial reporting includes those policies and
procedures that (1)pertain to the maintenance of records that, in
reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and
dispositions of the assets of the company; (2)provide reasonable
assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of
financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting
principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the company are being made
only in accordance with authorizations of management and directors of the
company; and (3)provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or
timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the
companys assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements.
because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial
reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. also, projections of any
evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that controls
may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of
compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
in our opinion, managements assessment that the st. paul travelers
companies,inc. and subsidiaries maintained effective internal control
over financial reporting as of december31, 2005, is fairly stated, in all
material respects, based on criteria
established in internal control - integrated framework issued by the committee
of sponsoring organizations of the treadway commission (coso). also, in our opinion, the st.
paul travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries maintained, in all
material respects, effective internal control over financial reporting as of december31,
2005, based on criteria established in
internal control - integrated framework issued by the committee of sponsoring
organizations of the treadway commission (coso).
we also have audited, in accordance with the standards of the public
company accounting oversight board (united states), the consolidated balance sheet of the st. paul travelers companies,inc.
and subsidiaries as of december31, 2005 and 2004, and the related consolidated statements of income,
changes in shareholders equity, and cash flows for each of the years in the
three-year period ended december31, 2005, and our report dated february27, 2006 expressed an unqualified opinion on those consolidated
financial statements.
/s/
kpmg llp
kpmg llp
minneapolis, minnesota
february27, 2006
item9b. other
information
not applicable.
partiii
item10. directors and executive
officers of the registrant
executive officers of the company
set forth below is information concerning the
companys executive officers as of february27, 2006.
name
age
office
jay s. fishman
chairman of the board of directors, chief
executive officer and president
jay s. benet
vice chairman and chief financial officer
irwin r. ettinger
vice chairman
william h. heyman
vice chairman and chief investment officer
brian w. maclean
executive vice president and chief
operating officer
andy f. bessette
executivevicepresidentandchiefadministrativeofficer
kenneth f. spence,iii
executive vice president and general
counsel
doreen spadorcia
executive vice president  claim
joseph p. lacher,jr.
executive vice president  personal
jay s. fishman, 53, has been chairman since september2005
and chief executive officer and president of the company since joining spc in october2001.
he held the additional title of chairman of spc from october2001 until
the merger. prior to october2001, mr.fishman was chief operating
officer of finance and risk for citigroup inc, where he was responsible for coordinating
all risk and financial functions throughout that company. he was also then
serving as chief executive officer and president of tighi (since 1998) and as
chairman (from march2000 to january2001), and as head of citigroups
global insurance businesses and the consumer business in japan and western
europe. mr.fishman held several key executive posts at primerica,
travelers and citigroup from 1989 to october2001.
jay s. benet, 53, has been vice chairman and chief
financial officer since august2005, and before that, he was executive
vice president and chief financial officer of the company since the merger, and
from february2002 until the merger, he held those same offices at tpc.
from march2001 until january2002, mr.benet was the worldwide
head of financial planning, analysis and reporting at citigroup and chief
financial officer for citigroups global consumer europe, middle east and
africa unit between april2000 and march2001. before that, mr.benet
spent 10 years in various executive positions with travelers life&
annuity, including chief financial officer of travelers life& annuity
and executive vice president, group annuity from december1998 to april2000,
and senior vice president group annuity from december1996 to december1998.
prior to joining travelers life& annuity, mr.benet was a
partner of coopers& lybrand (now pricewaterhousecoopers).
irwin r. ettinger, 67, has been vice chairman of the company
since the merger. prior to that time, he was vice chairman of tpc since june2002.
mr.ettinger served as the chief accounting and tax officer for citigroup
from 1998 to may2002 and held other positions of increasing
responsibility since joining citigroup in 1987. he joined citigroup from arthur
young& co. (now ernst& young) where he was a partner for 18
years.
william h. heyman, 57, has been vice chairman since may2005,
and before that, he was executive vice president and chief investment officer
of the company since the merger. prior to the merger, he held the same offices with
spc since he joined spc in may2002. mr.heyman held various
executive positions with citigroup from 1995 through 2002, including the
position of chairman of citigroup investments from 2000 to 2002. prior to
joining citigroup in 1995, mr.heyman was, successively, a managing
director of salomon brothers; director of the division of market regulation of
the u.s. securities and exchange commission; and a managing director of smith
barney.
brian w. maclean, 52, has been executive vice president and
chief operating officer since may2005. prior to that, he had been
co-chief operating officer of the company since february1, 2005. before
that, he was executive vice president, claim services for the company, and
prior thereto, for tpc. prior to that, mr.maclean served as president of
select accounts for tighi from july1999 to january2002. he also
served as chief financial officer of claim services from march1993 to june1996.
from june1996 to july1999, mr.maclean was chief financial
officer for commercial. he joined tighi in 1988.
andy f. bessette, 52, has been executive vice president and
chief administrative officer of the company since the merger, and prior to
that, he held the same offices with spc since joining spc in january2002.
before that, he was vice president of corporate real estate and services for
tpc. from 1980 to december2001, mr.bessette held a number of
management positions at tighi.
kenneth f. spence,iii, 50, has been executive vice president and
general counsel of the company since august2004. from the date of the
merger until august2004, mr.spence served in several leadership
positions in the companys legal services group, and from april1998 until
the merger, in spcs legal services group. mr.spence joined spc in april1998,
upon spcs merger with usf&g corporation, where he had served as legal
counsel.
doreen spadorcia, 48, has been executive vice president
claim, since march2, 2005. prior to that, she was president and chief
executive officer of bond operations for the company since the merger and,
before that, for tpc since june2002. from 1994 to may2002, she
managed the tpc bond claim operation and served as general counsel of that
business unit. she joined tighi in 1986 as a claim attorney.
joseph p. lacher,jr., 36, has been executive vice president of
personal for the company since january2005 and prior to that, he had been
senior vice president of the company in charge of those operations. prior to
the merger, he was executive vice president  personal for tpc. before that, he
was senior vice president of product& actuarial for tpcs personal
insurance operations since april2001. mr.lacher was senior vice
president of personal strategic distribution for tighi from april1999 to april2001,
and from april1996 to april1999, he was chief financial officer of
select accounts. mr.lacher joined tighi in 1991.
the section16(a)beneficial ownership
reporting compliance sectionof the companys proxy statement relating to
its annual meeting of shareholders to be held may3, 2006 is incorporated
herein by reference.
the election of directors  nominees for election
as directors sectionof the proxy statement relating to the annual
meeting of shareholders to be held may3, 2006 is incorporated herein by
reference.
code of
ethics
the company has adopted a code
of business conduct and ethics (code of ethics) that applies to all
employees, including executive officers, and to directors. the code of ethics
is available on the corporate governance page of the companys internet website
at www.stpaultravelers.com. if the company ever were to amend or waive
any provision of its code of ethics that applies to the companys principal
executive officer, principal financial officer, principal accounting officer,
or any person performing similar functions, the company intends to satisfy its
disclosure obligations with respect to any such waiver or amendment by posting
such information on its internet website set forth above rather than by filing
a form 8-k.
item11. executive compensation
the executive compensation sectionand the election
of directorsnon-employee director compensation sections of the companys
proxy statement relating to its annual meeting of shareholders to be held may3,
2006, are incorporated herein by reference.
item12. security ownership of
certain beneficial owners and management and related shareholder matters
the share ownership information sectionof
the companys proxy statement relating to its annual meeting of shareholders to
be held may3, 2006, is incorporated herein by reference.
equity
compensation plan information
the following table sets forth information as of december31,
2005 regarding the companys equity compensation plans. the only plan pursuant
to which the company may make equity grants is the st. paul travelers companies,inc.
2004 stock incentive plan (the 2004 incentive plan) that was approved by
shareholders at the companys 2004 annual meeting on july28, 2004. any
equity compensation plan of either spc or tpc that existed prior to the merger
had either terminated or otherwise could not be used for additional equity
grants after the 2004 incentive plan was approved. however, equity grants that
were outstanding under these plans were not affected by the plans terminations
or inability to issue additional equity grants. in addition, certain stock
options were granted previously under the st. paul companies,inc. amended
and restated 1994 stock incentive plan (the 1994 st. paul plan) and the
travelers property casualty corp. 2002 stock incentive plan (the travelers
stock plan) that allowed the option holder to use the reload method of option
exercise. these option holders may continue to use the reload exercise method,
and any reload options granted as a result will be issued under the 1994 st.
paul plan or travelers stock plan, respectively.
plan category
number of
securities to be
issueduponexercise
of outstanding
options, warrants
and rights
(a)
weighted average
exercise price of
outstandingoptions,
warrants and rights
(b)
number of securities
remainingavailablefor
future issuance under
equity compensation
plans (excluding
securities reflected in
column (a))
(c)
equity compensation plans approved by
security holders(1)
43,250,915
$
41.64 pershare
33,574,081
(3)
equity compensation plans not approved by
security holders(2)
489,155
$
40.52 per share
total
43,740,070
$
41.63 per share
33,574,081
(3)
(1) in addition to the 2004 incentive plan, these numbers also include the
1994 st. paul plan, the st. paul global stock option plan, certain plans for
st. pauls united kingdom and ireland employees, the travelers stock plan, and
any other plan approved by the respective shareholders of spc and tpc prior to
the merger. includes shares underlying stock options under the plans described
above. the options granted under the travelers stock plan were converted to
stock options to purchase company common stock in connection with the merger.
the weighted average exercise price in column (b)of the table reflects
all such stock options. shares of deferred stock or phantom stock units that
may be settled in shares of common stock are included in column (a)of the
table, but are not included in column (b)for purposes of the weighted
average exercise price of stock options.
(2) the st. paul international 1988 stock option plan and the st. paul
holdings 1996 stock option plan were established to grant options to certain
eligible employees of spcs united kingdom operations. the options granted
under these plans were priced at the market price of the companys common stock
on the date of grant and were eligible for exercise at any time from three to
ten years after the date of grant. no additional options may be granted under
these plans.
(3) these are shares available for grant as of december31, 2005 under
the 2004 incentive plan pursuant to which the compensation committee of the
board of directors may make various stock-based awards including grants of
stock options, restricted stock and stock appreciation rights. the 2004
incentive plan had 35 million shares initially authorized for issuance. in
addition to these 35 million shares, the following shares will become available
for grant under the 2004 incentive plan and, to the extent such shares have
become available as of december31, 2005, they are included in the table
as available for grant: (i)shares covered by outstanding awards under the
2004 incentive plan, the 1994 st. paul plan and the travelers stock plan that
are forfeited or otherwise terminated or settled in cash or other property
rather than settled through the issuance of shares; (ii)shares that are
used to pay the exercise price of stock options and shares used to pay
withholding taxes on equity awards generally; and (iii)shares purchased
by the company on the open market using cash from option exercises, as limited
by the 2004 incentive plan.
except
for shares delivered to or retained in the travelers stock plan in connection
with the withholding of taxes applicable to the exercise of outstanding options
that have reload features, the provisions of the preceding paragraph that result in shares becoming available
for future grants under the 2004 incentive plan also apply to any awards
granted under the 1994 st. paul plan and the travelers stock plan that were
outstanding on the effective date of the 2004 incentive plan.
in april1998, spc merged with usf&g
corporation (usf&g), and the outstanding options to purchase usf&g
stock were converted into options to purchase spcs common stock. on december31,
2005, 309,422 shares were subject to outstanding options pursuant to that conversion
(with a weighted average exercise price of $41.80) related to plans that had
not been approved by usf&g shareholders prior to the merger. no additional
options could be granted under those plans subsequent to the april1998
merger. these options are not included in the preceding table.
item13. certain relationships and
related transactions
the certain relationships and related transactions
section of the companys proxy statement relating to its annual meeting of
shareholders to be held may3, 2006, is incorporated herein by reference.
item14. principal accounting fees
and services
the audit and non-audit fees sectionof the
companys proxy statement relating to its annual meeting of shareholders to be
held may3, 2006, is incorporated herein by reference.
partiv
item15. exhibits and financial
statement schedules
documents filed as a part of the report:
(1) financial
statements. see index to consolidated financial statements on page110
hereof.
(2) financial
statement schedules. see index to consolidated financial statements and
schedules on page199 hereof.
(3) exhibits:
see exhibitindex on pages 207-210 hereof.
signatures
pursuant to the requirements of section13 or
15(d)of the securities exchange act of 1934, the st. paul travelers
companies,inc. has duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by
the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.
thest.paultravelerscompanies,inc.
(registrant)
date: february27, 2006
by
/s/bruce a. backberg
bruce a.
backberg
senior
vice president
(authorized
signatory)
pursuant to the requirements of the securities
exchange act of 1934, this report has been signed below by the following
persons on behalf of the st. paul travelers companies,inc. and in the
capacities and on the dates indicated.
date
by
/s/jay s. fishman
director, chairman, chief executive officer and president
february27,
jay s.
fishman
(principal executive
officer)
by
/s/jay s. benet
vice chairman and chief financial officer (principal
february27,
jay s.
benet
financial officer)
by
/s/douglas k. russell
senior vice president, corporate controller and treasurer
february27,
douglas k.
russell
(principal accounting
officer)
by
*
director
february27,
john h.
dasburg
by
*
director
february27,
leslie b.
disharoon
by
*
director
february27,
janet m.
dolan
by
*
director
february27,
kenneth m.
duberstein
by
*
director
february27,
lawrence
g. graev
by
*
director
february27,
thomas r.
hodgson
by
*
director
february27,
robert i.
lipp
by
*
director
february27,
blythe j. mcgarvie
by
*
director
february27,
glen d. nelson, m.d.
by
*
director
february27,
clarence
otis,jr.
by
*
director
february27,
laurie j.
thomsen
*by
/s/bruce a. backberg
february27,
bruce a.
backberg,
attorney-in-fact
index to consolidated financial statements and schedules
page
report of independent
registered public accounting firm
*
consolidated statement of
income for the years ended december 31, 2005, 2004 and 2003
*
consolidated balance sheet at december
31, 2005 and 2004
*
consolidated statement of
changes in shareholders equity for the years ended december 31, 2005, 2004
and 2003
*
consolidated statement of cash
flows for the years ended december 31, 2005, 2004 and 2003
*
notes to consolidated
financial statements
*
schedules:
schedule ii  condensed financial
information of registrant (parent company only)
schedule iii  supplementary insurance information
schedule
v  valuation and qualifying accounts
schedule vi  supplementary information concerning
property-casualty insurance operations
* see index on page 110.
report of independent registered public accounting
firm
the board of directors and
stockholders
the st. paul travelers
companies, inc.:
under
date of february 27, 2006, we reported on the consolidated balance sheet of the
st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries as of december 31, 2005 and
2004, and the related consolidated statements of income, changes in
shareholders equity, and cash flows for each of the years in the three-year
period ended december 31, 2005, which are included in this form 10-k. in connection with our audits of the
aforementioned consolidated financial statements, we also audited the related
financial statement schedules as listed in the accompanying index. these
financial statement schedules are the responsibility of the companys
management. our responsibility is to
express an opinion on these financial statement schedules based on our audits.
in
our opinion, such financial statement schedules, when considered in relation to
the basic consolidated financial statements taken as a whole, present fairly,
in all material respects, the information set forth therein.
/s/kpmg
llp
kpmg
llp
minneapolis, minnesota
february 27, 2006
schedule ii
the st. paul travelers companies, inc.
(parent company only)
condensed financial information of registrant
(in millions)
condensed statement of income (loss)
for the period ended december 31,*
revenues
net investment income
$
$
$
net realized investment gains (losses)
(75
)
other revenues
total revenues
(66
)
expenses
interest
other
total expenses
loss from continuing operations before
income taxes and equity in net income of subsidiaries
(143
)
(217
)
(101
)
income tax benefit
(27
)
(72
)
(36
)
loss from continuing operations before
equity in net income of subsidiaries
(116
)
(145
)
(65
)
equity in net income of subsidiaries, net
of minority interest
2,215
1,027
1,761
income from continuing operations
2,099
1,696
discontinued operations
(477
)
net income
$
1,622
$
$
1,696
* data
for 2005 represents results of the st. paul travelers companies, inc. (parent
company only) for the year ended december 31, 2005. data for 2004 represents results of the st.
paul travelers companies, inc. (parent company only) for the nine-month period
from the merger date of april 1, 2004 through december 31, 2004. data for 2003
represents historical data for travelers property casualty corp. (parent
company only) for the twelve months ended december 31, 2003.
the condensed financial
statements should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial
statements and notes thereto.
schedule ii
the st. paul travelers companies, inc.
(parent company only)
condensed financial information of registrant
(in millions)
condensed balance sheet
at december 31,
assets
fixed maturities
$
$
equity securities
short-term securities
1,109
net assets of discontinued operations
1,696
investment in subsidiaries at equity
23,708
22,042
other assets
1,038
total assets
$
26,046
$
25,010
liabilities
debt
$
3,272
$
3,809
other
liabilities
total liabilities
3,743
3,809
shareholders
equity
preferred stock:
savings planconvertible preferred stock
(0.5 shares and 0.6 shares issued and outstanding)
guaranteed obligationstock ownership plan
(5
)
common stock (1,750.0 shares authorized,
694.6 and 670.7 shares issued; 693.4 and 670.3 shares outstanding)
18,179
17,414
retained earnings
3,750
2,744
accumulated other changes in equity from
nonowner sources
treasury stock, at cost (1.2 and 0.4
shares)
(47
)
(14
)
unearned
compensation
(83
)
(83
)
total shareholders equity
22,303
21,201
total liabilities and shareholders equity
$
26,046
$
25,010
the condensed financial
statements should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial
statements and notes thereto.
schedule ii
the st. paul travelers companies, inc.
(parent company only)
condensed financial information of registrant
(in millions)
condensed statement of cash flows
for the period ended december 31,*
cash
flows from operating activities
net income
$
1,622
$
$
1,696
adjustments to reconcile net income to net
cash provided by operating activities:
equity in net income of subsidiaries
(2,215
)
(1,027
)
(1,761
)
loss from discontinued operations, net of
tax
dividends received from consolidated
subsidiaries
1,880
capital contributed to subsidiaries
(890
)
(940
)
(1,445
)
deferred federal income tax expense
change in income taxes payable
(234
)
(389
)
(36
)
recoveries from former affiliate
net transfer of pension asset and
post-retirement liability
(247
)
other
(61
)
net cash provided by (used in) operating
activities
(326
)
cash
flows from investing activities
net
purchases of short-term securities
(982
)
(87
)
(180
)
other
investments, net
(820
)
net proceeds
from the sale of discontinued operations
1,994
net cash provided by (used in) investing
activities
(67
)
(180
)
cash
flows from financing activities
issuance of
debt
1,382
payment of
debt
(811
)
(173
)
(550
)
issuance of
common stock-maturity of equity unit forward contracts
dividends to
shareholders
(628
)
(561
)
(282
)
treasury
stock acquirednet employee stock-based compensation
(33
)
(1
)
(18
)
treasury
stock purchased
(40
)
issuance of
common stock-employee stock options
payment of
dividend on subsidiarys preferred stock
(5
)
transfer of
employee benefit obligations to former affiliates
(22
)
other
(3
)
net cash provided by (used in) financing
activities
(469
)
(346
)
net increase
(decrease) in cash
(16
)
(1
)
cash at
beginning of period
cash at
end of period
$
$
$
supplemental
disclosure of cash flow information
cash
received during the year for taxes
$
$
$
cash paid
during the year for interest
$
$
$
* data for 2005 represents results of the st. paul travelers companies,
inc. (parent company only) for the year ended december 31, 2005. data for 2004
represents results of the st. paul travelers companies, inc. (parent company
only) for the nine-month period from the merger date of april 1, 2004 through
december 31, 2004. data for 2003
represents historical data for travelers property casualty corp. (parent
company only) for the twelve months ended december 31, 2003.
the condensed financial
statements should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial
statements and notes thereto.
schedule iii
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and
subsidiaries
supplementary insurance information
2003-2005
(in millions)
segment
deferred
policy
acquisition
costs
claims
and
claim
adjustment
expense
reserves
unearned
premiums
premium
revenue
net
investment
income (a)
claims
and
claim
adjustment
expenses
amortization
of deferred
acquisition
costs
other
operating
expenses(b)
premiums
written
commercial
$
$
44,154
$
4,612
$
8,574
$
1,944
$
7,448
$
1,252
$
1,656
$
8,429
specialty
12,549
3,335
5,739
3,728
5,729
personal
4,304
2,980
6,028
3,751
1,048
6,228
totalreportable segments
1,527
61,007
10,927
20,341
3,158
14,927
3,252
3,214
20,386
other
consolidated
$
1,527
$
61,090
$
10,927
$
20,341
$
3,165
$
14,927
$
3,252
$
3,515
$
20,386
commercial
$
$
43,669
$
5,026
$
8,816
$
1,728
$
7,524
$
1,245
$
1,581
$
8,311
specialty
11,712
3,528
4,642
4,660
4,771
personal
3,603
2,756
5,580
3,255
5,929
totalreportable segments
1,559
58,984
11,310
19,038
2,657
15,439
2,978
2,896
19,011
other
consolidated
$
1,559
$
59,070
$
11,310
$
19,038
$
2,663
$
15,439
$
2,978
$
3,181
$
19,011
commercial
$
$
28,746
$
3,958
$
6,552
$
1,324
$
5,170
$
$
$
6,862
specialty
2,428
1,171
1,258
personal
3,300
2,439
4,822
3,335
5,081
totalreportable segments
34,474
7,111
12,545
1,868
9,118
1,984
1,632
13,201
other
consolidated
$
$
34,573
$
7,111
$
12,545
$
1,869
$
9,118
$
1,984
$
1,808
$
13,201
(a) beginning in the second quarter of 2004, the company developed a
methodology to allocate net investment income and invested assets to the
identified segments. see note 1 to the consolidated financial statements for
further discussion of this methodology. in 2002 and 2003, net investment income
for each segment was accounted for separately, except for the portion earned on
the investment of shareholders equity, which was allocated based on assigned
capital.
(b) expense allocations are determined in accordance with prescribed
statutory accounting practices. these practices make a reasonable allocation of
all expenses to those product lines with which they are associated.
schedule v
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and
subsidiaries
valuation and qualifying accounts
(in millions)
balanceat
beginning
of period
chargedto
costs and
expenses(1)
chargedto
other
accounts(2)
deductions(3)
balanceat
end of
period
reinsurance
recoverables
$
$
$
$
$
allowance
for uncollectible:
agency loans
$
$
$
$
$
premiums receivable from underwriting
activities
$
$
$
(14
)
$
$
deductibles
$
$
(2
)
$
$
$
reinsurance
recoverables
$
$
$
$
(34
)
$
allowance
for uncollectible:
agency loans
$
$
$
$
$
premiums receivable from underwriting
activities
$
$
$
$
$
deductibles
$
$
$
$
$
reinsurance
recoverables
$
$
$
$
$
allowance
for uncollectible:
premiums receivable from underwriting
activities
$
$
$
$
$
deductibles
$
$
$
$
$
(1) includes balances acquired in the merger and
accounting conformity adjustments.
(2) charged to claims and claim adjustment
expenses in the consolidated statement of income (loss).
(3) credited to the related asset account. amount
in 2004 includes a $62 million addition related to the commutation of certain
reinsurance agreements, offset by $28 million of deductions.
schedule vi
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and
subsidiaries
supplementary information concerning property-casualty
insurance operations (1)
2003-2005
(in millions)
affiliation
with
registrant
(2)
deferred
policy
acquisition
costs
claims
and
claimadjustment
expense reserves
discountfrom
reserves for
unpaid claims
unearned
premiums
earned
premiums
net
investment
income
claims
and claim
adjustment
expenses incurred
related to:
amortization
of deferred
acquisition
costs
paidclaims
and claim
adjustment
expenses
premiums
written
current
year
prior
year
$
1,527
$
61,007
$
1,070
$
10,927
$
20,341
$
3,165
$
14,450
$
$
3,252
$
13,098
$
20,386
$
1,559
$
58,984
$
1,037
$
11,310
$
19,038
$
2,663
$
12,855
$
2,399
$
2,978
$
11,551
$
19,011
$
$
34,474
$
$
7,111
$
12,545
$
1,869
$
8,554
$
$
1,984
$
8,157
$
13,201
(1) excludes accident and health insurance
business.
(2) consolidated property-casualty insurance
operations.
exhibit index
exhibit
number
description of exhibit
2.1
agreement
and plan of merger, dated as of november 16, 2003, as amended, among the st.
paul companies, inc. (spc), travelers property casualty corp. (tpc) and
adams acquisition corp. (adams), along with the related articles of
incorporation amendments and bylaws amendment (included as appendices a, b, c
and d, respectively, to the joint proxy statement/prospectus forming a part
of the registration statement) was filed as exhibit 2.1 to the registration
statement on form s-4, amendment no. 1, of the st. paul companies, inc. filed
on february 13, 2004 (registration no. 333-111072), and is incorporated
herein by reference.
2.2
second
amendment agreement dated as of march 18, 2004 to the agreement and plan of
merger dated as of november 16, 2003, as amended, by and among spc, tpc and
adams was filed as exhibit 2.1 to the form 8-k of spc filed on march 18,
2004, and is incorporated herein by reference.
3.1
amended and
restated articles of incorporation of the st. paul travelers companies, inc.
(the company), effective as of april 1, 2004, were filed as exhibit 3.1 to
the companys form 8-k filed on april 1, 2004, and are incorporated herein by
reference.
3.2
amended and
restated bylaws of the company, effective as of february 7, 2006, were filed
as exhibit 3.2 to the companys form 8-k filed on february 10, 2006, and are
incorporated herein by reference.
10.1
trademark
license agreement dated as of august 19, 2002, by and between tpc and the
travelers insurance company, was filed as exhibit 10.2 to tpcs quarterly
report on form 10-q for the fiscal quarter ended september 30, 2002, and is
incorporated herein by reference.
10.2
revolving
credit agreement, dated june 10, 2005, between the company and a syndicate of
financial institutions, was filed as exhibit 10.1 to the companys form 10-q
for the fiscal quarter ended june 30, 2005 and is incorporated herein by
reference.
10.3
repurchase
agreement, dated march 29, 2005, between the company and nuveen investments,
inc. was filed as exhibit 10.1 to the companys form 8-k filed on april 1,
2005 and is incorporated herein by reference.
10.4
separation
agreement, dated april 1, 2005, between the company and nuveen investments,
inc. was filed as exhibit 10.2 to the companys form 8-k filed on april 1,
2005 and is incorporated herein by reference.
10.5
forward sale
agreement, dated april 6, 2005, among the company, merrill lynch
international and merrill lynch, pierce, fenner & smith, as agent and
collateral agent, was filed as exhibit 10.2 to the companys form 8-k filed
on april 12, 2005 and is incorporated herein by reference.
10.6
forward sale
agreement, dated april 6, 2005, among the company, morgan stanley & co.
international limited and morgan stanley & co. incorporated, as agent and
collateral agent, was filed as exhibit 10.3 to the companys form 8-k filed
on april 12, 2005 and is incorporated herein by reference.
10.7
indemnity
agreement, dated april 6, 2005, among the company, nuveen investments, inc.,
merrill lynch & co., inc., merrill lynch, pierce, fenner & smith
incorporated, morgan stanley & co. incorporated and merrill lynch
international limited was filed as exhibit 10.4 to the companys form 8-k
filed on april 12, 2005 and is incorporated herein by reference.
10.8
indemnity
agreement, dated april 6, 2005, among the company, nuveen investments, inc.,
morgan stanley, morgan stanley & co. incorporated, merrill lynch, pierce,
fenner & smith incorporated and morgan stanley & co. international
limited was filed as exhibit 10.5 to the companys form 8-k filed on april
12, 2005 and is incorporated herein by reference.
10.9*
employment
agreement between the company and jay s. fishman was filed as exhibit 10.1 to
the companys quarterly report on form 10-q for the fiscal quarter ended june
30, 2004, and is incorporated herein by reference.
10.10*
amendment to
employment agreement between the company and jay s. fishman was filed as
exhibit 10.1 to the companys quarterly report on form 10-q for the fiscal
quarter ended september 30, 2004, and is incorporated herein by reference.
10.11*
amended and
restated executive employment agreement between tpc and robert i. lipp, dated
as of november 16, 2003 was filed as exhibit 10.22 to tpcs annual report on
form 10-k for the fiscal year ended december 31, 2003, and is incorporated
herein by reference.
10.12*
assignment
and assumption agreement dated as of april 1, 2004 by and between tpc, as the
assignor, and the company, as assignee, relating to the amended and restated
executive employment agreement between tpc and robert i. lipp was filed as
exhibit 10.15 to the companys quarterly report on form 10-q for the fiscal
quarter ended march 31, 2004, and is incorporated herein by reference.
10.13*
letter
agreement between william h. heyman and the company, dated april 27, 2005,
was filed as exhibit 10.3 to the companys quarterly report on form 10-q for
the fiscal quarter ended march 31, 2005, and is incorporated herein by
reference.
10.14*
letter
agreement between william h. heyman and the company, dated april 27, 2005,
was filed as exhibit 10.4 to the companys quarterly report on form 10-q for
the fiscal quarter ended march 31, 2005, and is incorporated herein by
reference.
10.15*
the st. paul
travelers companies, inc. 2004 stock incentive plan was filed as exhibit 10.2
to the companys quarterly report on form 10-q for the fiscal quarter ended
june 30, 2005, and is incorporated herein by reference.
10.16*
the st. paul
travelers companies, inc. senior executive performance plan was filed as
exhibit 10.1 to the companys quarterly report on form 10-q for the fiscal
quarter ended march 31, 2005, and is incorporated herein by reference.
10.17*
the st. paul
travelers companies, inc. amended and restated deferred compensation plan for
non-employee directors was filed as exhibit 99.2 of the companys
registration statement on form s-8 (registration no. 333-120998) dated
december 3, 2004, and is incorporated herein by reference.
10.18*
form of
stock option grant notification and agreement is filed herewith.
10.19*
form of
restricted stock award notification and agreement is filed herewith.
10.20*
form of
performance share award notification and agreement is filed herewith.
10.21*
form of
executive officer capital accumulation program restricted stock award
notification and agreement was filed as exhibit 10.2 to the companys
quarterly report on form 10-q for the fiscal quarter ended march 31, 2005,
and is incorporated herein by reference.
10.22*
non-employee
director annual equity grant notification and agreement was filed as exhibit
10.1 to the companys form 8-k filed on may 9, 2005, and is incorporated
herein by reference.
10.23*
the spc
deferred stock plan for non-employee directors was filed as exhibit 10(a) to
the companys form 10-k for the fiscal year ended december 31, 2000, and is
incorporated herein by reference.
10.24*
the spc
amended and restated 1994 stock incentive plan was filed as exhibit 10(f) to
the companys form 10-k for the fiscal year ended december 31, 2001, and is
incorporated herein by reference.
10.25*
the spc
directors charitable award program, as amended, was filed as exhibit 10(d)
to the companys form 10-k for the fiscal year ended december 31, 2000, and
is incorporated herein by reference.
10.26*
the spc
amended and restated special severance policy was filed as exhibit 10(e) to
the companys form 10-k for the fiscal year ended december 31, 1998, and is
incorporated herein by reference.
10.27*
the
amendment to the spc amended and restated special severance policy was filed
as exhibit 10(e) to the companys form 10-k for the fiscal year ended
december 31, 2000, and is incorporated herein by reference.
10.28*
the spc
annual incentive plan was filed as an exhibit to the spc proxy statement
relating to the spc 1999 annual meeting of shareholders that was held on may
4, 1999 and is incorporated herein by reference.
10.29*
the spc
deferred management incentive awards plan was filed as exhibit 10(a) to the
companys form 10-k for the fiscal year ended december 31, 1997 and is incorporated
herein by reference.
10.30*
the spc
directors deferred compensation plan was filed as exhibit 10(b) to the
companys form 10-k for the fiscal year ended december 31, 1997 and is
incorporated herein by reference.
10.31*
the spc
benefit equalization plan2001 revision and the first and second amendments
thereto were filed as exhibit 10.27 to the companys form 10-k for the fiscal
year ended december 31, 2004 and are incorporated herein by reference.
10.32*
tpc
compensation plan for non-employee directors as amended on january 22, 2004
was filed as exhibit 10.16 to tpcs annual report on form 10-k for the fiscal
year ended december 31, 2003 and is incorporated herein by reference.
10.33*
tpc 2002
stock incentive plan, as amended effective january 23, 2003, was filed as
exhibit 10.22 to tpcs annual report on form 10-k for the fiscal year ended
december 31, 2002, and is incorporated herein by reference.
10.34*
tpc deferred
compensation plan was filed as exhibit 10.23 to tpcs annual report on form
10-k for the fiscal year ended december 31, 2002, and is incorporated herein
by reference.
10.35*
tpc benefit
equalization plan was filed as exhibit 10.24 to tpcs annual report on form
10-k for the fiscal year ended december 31, 2002, and is incorporated herein
by reference.
10.36*
the st. paul
travelers companies, inc. deferred compensation plan effective december 1,
2004 was filed as exhibit 99.1 to the companys registration statement on
form s-8 (registration no. 333-120998) dated december 3, 2004, and is
incorporated herein by reference.
10.37*
the
companys senior executive performance plan was filed as exhibit 10.1 to the
companys quarterly report on form 10-q for the fiscal quarter ended march
31, 2005, and is incorporated herein by reference.
10.38
amended and
restated tax allocation agreement, dated as of march 27, 2002, between tpc
and citigroup inc., was filed as exhibit 10.2 to tpcs quarterly report on
form 10-q for the fiscal quarter ended march 31, 2002, and is incorporated
herein by reference.
10.39*
the st. paul
travelers companies, inc. severance plan is filed herewith.
10.40*
form of
non-solicitation and non-disclosure agreement, amending the st. paul
travelers companies, inc. severance
plan, was filed as exhibit 99 to the companys form 8-k filed on february 16,
2006, and is incorporated herein by reference.
12.1
statement
regarding the computation of the ratio of earnings to fixed charges and the
ratio of earnings to combined fixed charges and preferred stock dividends is
filed herewith.
21.1
subsidiaries
of the company is filed herewith.
23.1
consent of
kpmg llp, independent registered public accounting firm, with respect to the
incorporation by reference of kpmg llps audit report into registration
statements on forms s-8 of the company (sec file no. 33-24575, no. 33-49273,
no. 33-56987, no. 333-01065, no. 333-22329, no. 333-25203, no. 333-28915, no.
333-50941, no. 333-50943, no. 333-67983, no. 333-63114, no. 333-63118, no.
333-65726, no. 333-65728, no. 333-84740, no. 333-107698, no. 333-107699, no.
333-114135, no. 333-117726, no. 333-120998 and no. 333-128026) and forms s-3
(sec file no. 333-92466, no. 333-92466-01, no. 333-98525, no. 333-98525-01
and no. 333-130323) is filed herewith.
24.1
power of
attorney is filed herewith.
31.1
certification
of jay s. fishman, chairman and chief executive officer of the company, as
required by section 302 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002 is filed herewith.
31.2
certification
of jay s. benet, vice chairman and chief financial officer of the company, as
required by section 302 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002 is filed herewith.
32.1
certification
of jay s. fishman, chairman and chief executive officer of the company, as
required by section 906 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002 is filed herewith.
32.2
certification
of jay s. benet, vice chairman and chief financial officer of the company, as
required by section 906 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002 is filed herewith.
the total amount of
securities authorized pursuant to any instrument defining rights of holders of
long-term debt of the company does not exceed 10% of the total assets of the
company and its consolidated subsidiaries. therefore, the company is not filing
any instruments evidencing long-term debt. however, the company will furnish
copies of any such instrument to the securities and exchange commission upon
request.
copies of any of the
exhibits referred to above will be furnished to security holders who make
written request therefor to the st. paul travelers companies, inc., 385
washington street, saint paul, mn, 55102, attention: corporate secretary.
filed herewith
* management contract or compensatory plan in which directors and/or
executive officers are eligible to participate.
