10-k
a07-4921_110k.htm
10-k
united states securities
and exchange commission
washington, d.c. 20549
form10-k
x annual report pursuant to section13
or 15(d)
of the securities exchange act of 1934
for the fiscal year ended december31, 2006
or
o transition report pursuant to section13
or 15(d)
of the securities exchange act of 1934
for the transition period from  to
commission file number 001-10898
the st. paul travelers
companies,inc.
(exact
name of registrant as specified in its charter)
minnesota
41-0518860
(state or other jurisdiction of
(i.r.s. employer
incorporation or organization)
identification no.)
washington street,
st. paul, mn 55102
(address
of principal executive offices) (zip code)
(651)
310-7911
(registrants telephone
number, including area code)
securities registered pursuant to section12(b)of
the act:
title of each class
nameofeachexchangeon
whichregistered
common stock, without par
value
new york stock exchange
4.5% convertible junior
subordinated notes due 2032
new york stock exchange
securities
registered pursuant to section12(g)of the
act:none
indicate
by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer (as defined in rule405
of the securities act). yesxno o
indicate
by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to section13
or section15(d)of the act. yes ono
x
indicate
by check mark whether the registrant (1)has filed all reports required to
be filed by section13 or 15(d)of the securities exchange act of
1934 during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the
registrant was required to file such reports), and (2)has been subject to
such filing requirements for the past 90 days. yes xnoo
indicate
by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to item 405 of
regulation s-k is not contained herein, and will not be contained, to the best
of registrants knowledge, in definitive proxy or information statements
incorporated by reference in part iii of this form 10-k or any amendment to
this form 10-k.x
indicate
by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an
accelerated filer, or a non-accelerated filer. see definition of accelerated
filer and large accelerated filer in rule 12b-2 of the act (check one):
large
accelerated filerxaccelerated fileronon-accelerated
filero
indicate
by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in rule 12b-2
of the act). yes ono x
as
of june 30, 2006, the aggregate market value of the registrants voting and
non-voting common equity held by non-affiliates was $30,756,413,821.
as
of february15, 2007, 675,597,123 shares of the registrants common stock
(without par value) were outstanding.
documents
incorporated by reference
portions
of the registrants proxy statement relating to the 2007 annual meeting of
shareholders are incorporated by reference into partiii of this report.
the st. paul travelers companies,inc.
annual report on form10-k
for fiscal year ended
december31, 2006
table
of contents
itemnumber
page
parti
1.
business
1a.
risk
factors
1b.
unresolved staff comments
2.
properties
3.
legal
proceedings
4.
submission of matters to a vote of security holders
partii
5.
market for registrants common equity, related
shareholder matters and issuer purchases of equity securities
6.
selected
financial data
7.
managements discussion and analysis of financial
condition and results of operations
7a.
quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market
risk
8.
financial statements and supplementary data
9.
changes in and disagreements with accountants on
accounting and financial disclosure
9a.
controls and procedures
9b.
other
information
partiii
10.
directors and executive officers of the registrant
11.
executive compensation
12.
security ownership of certain beneficial owners and
management and related shareholder matters
13.
certain relationships and related transactions
14.
principal accounting fees and services
partiv
15.
exhibits and financial statement schedules
signatures
index to consolidated financial statements and
schedules
exhibitindex
parti
item1. business
the st. paul travelers
companies,inc. (together with its consolidated subsidiaries, the company)
is a holding company principally engaged, through its subsidiaries, in
providing a wide range of commercial and personal property and casualty
insurance products and services to businesses, government units, associations
and individuals. the company, known as the st. paul companies,inc. (spc)
prior to its merger with travelers property casualty corp. (tpc) in 2004, is
incorporated as a general business corporation under the laws of the state of
minnesota and is one of the oldest insurance organizations in the united
states, dating back to 1853. the principal executive offices of the company are
located at 385washington street, st. paul, minnesota 55102, and the
telephone number is (651) 310-7911. the termsta in this document
refers to the st. paul travelers companies,inc., the parent holding
company excluding subsidiaries.
on april1, 2004, tpc
merged with a subsidiary of spc, as a result of which tpc became a wholly-owned
subsidiary of spc, and spc changed its name to the st. paul travelers companies,inc.
for accounting purposes, this transaction was accounted for as a reverse
acquisition with tpc treated as the accounting acquirer. accordingly, this
transaction was accounted for as a purchase business combination, using tpcs
historical financial information and applying fair value estimates to the
acquired assets, liabilities and commitments of spc as of april1, 2004.
beginning on april1, 2004, the results of operations and financial
condition of spc were consolidated with tpcs results of operations and
financial condition. accordingly, all financial information presented herein
for the twelve months ended december31, 2004 reflects the accounts of tpc
for the three months ended march31, 2004 and the consolidated accounts of
spc and tpc for the nine months ended december31, 2004.
tpc is a connecticut
corporation that was formed in 1979 and, prior to its march2002 initial
public offering of class a common stock, was an indirect wholly-owned
subsidiary of citigroup inc. (together with its consolidated subsidiaries,
citigroup). tpc was reorganized in connection with its ipo in march2002.
pursuant to the reorganization, which was completed on march19, 2002, tpcs
consolidated financial statements were adjusted to exclude the accounts of
certain formerly wholly-owned tpc subsidiaries, principally the travelers
insurance company and its subsidiaries (being the former u.s. life insurance
operations of tpc), certain other wholly-owned non-insurance subsidiaries of
tpc and substantially all of tpcs assets and certain liabilities not related
to the property casualty insurance business.
sta intends to change its
name to the travelers companies, inc. and will begin trading on the newyork
stock exchange under the new stock symbol trv during the first quarter of
2007.
for a summary of the
companys revenues, operating income and total assets by reportable business
segments, see note 2 of notes to the companys consolidated financial
statements.
property and casualty insurance operations
the property and casualty
insurance industry is highly competitive in the areas of price, service,
product offerings, agent relationships and method of distribution, i.e. use of
independent agents, exclusive agents and/or salaried employees. according toa.m.
best, there are approximately 975 property casualty organizations in the united
states, comprising approximately 2,400 property and casualty companies. of
those organizations, the top 150 accounted for approximately 93% of the
consolidated industrys total net written premiums in 2005. the company
competes with both foreign and domestic insurers. in addition, several property
and casualty insurers writing commercial lines of business, including the
company, offer products for alternative forms of risk protection in addition to
traditional insurance products. these products include large deductible
programs and various forms of self-insurance that utilize captive insurance
companies and risk retention groups. the companys competitive position in the
marketplace is based on many factors, including premiums charged; contract
terms and conditions; products and services
offered;
claim service; agent, broker and client relationships; ratings assigned by
independent rating agencies; local presence; geographic scope of business;
overall financial strength; qualifications of employees; and technology and
information systems.
geographic distribution
the
following table shows the distribution of the companys consolidated direct
written premiums for the year ended december31, 2006:
state
%of
total
new york
9.7
%
california
8.7
texas
7.3
florida
5.5
pennsylvania
4.6
massachusetts
4.4
new jersey
4.3
illinois
3.7
georgia
3.1
virginia
3.0
all other
domestic(1)
38.6
total domestic
92.9
international
7.1
consolidated
total
100.0
%
(1) no
other single state accounted for 3.0% or more of the total direct written
premiums written in 2006 by the companys domestic operations.
in august2006, the
company announced a realignment of two of its three reportable business
segments. the former commercial and specialty segments were realigned into two
new reportable segments: the business insurance segment and the financial,
professional& international insurance segment. the personal segment
was renamed personal insurance. the changes were designed to reflect the manner
in which the companys businesses are currently managed and represent an
aggregation of products and services based on type of customer, how the
business is marketed, and the manner in which risks are underwritten.
the following discussion
of the companys reportable business segments reflects the realigned segment
reporting structure. financial data for all prior periods presented was
reclassified to be consistent with the 2006 presentation.
business insurance
the
business insurance segment offers a broad array of property and casualty
insurance and insurance-related services to its clients primarily in the united
states. business insurance is organized into the following six groups, which
collectively comprise business insurance core operations:
select accounts serves small businesses for
property and casualty products, including commercial multi-peril, property,
general liability, commercial auto and workers compensation insurance.
commercial accounts serves primarily
mid-sized businesses for property and casualty products, including property,
general liability, commercial multi-peril, commercial auto and workers
compensation insurance. certain units included in commercial accounts prior to
the realignment
are now included in
the industry-focused underwriting, target risk underwriting or specialized
distribution groups.
national accounts comprises three business
units. the largest provides casualty products and services to large companies,
with particular emphasis on workers compensation, general liability and
automobile liability. national accounts also includes discover re, which
provides property and casualty insurance products on an unbundled basis using
third-party administrators for insureds who utilize programs such as
collateralized deductibles, captive reinsurers and self-insurance. in addition,
national accounts includes the commercial residual market business, which
primarily offers workers compensation products and services to the involuntary
market.
industry-focused underwriting. the following units serve
targeted industries with unique combinations of insurance coverage, risk
management, claims handling and other services:
construction serves a broad range of
construction businesses, offering guaranteed cost products for small to mid-sized
policyholders and loss sensitive programs for larger accounts. for the larger
accounts, the customer and the company work together in actively managing and
controlling exposure and claims and they share risk through policy features
such as deductibles or retrospective rating. products offered include workers
compensation, general liability and commercial auto coverages, and other risk
management solutions.
technology serves companies of all sizes
involved in telecommunications, information technology, medical technology and
electronics manufacturing, offering a well-balanced comprehensive portfolio of
products and services. these products include property, commercial auto,
general liability, workers compensation, umbrella, internet liability, technology
errors and omissions coverages and global companion products.
public sector services markets insurance
products and services to public entities including municipalities, counties,
indian nation gaming and selected special government districts such as water
and sewer utilities. the policies written by this unit typically cover
property, commercial auto, general liability and errors and omissions
exposures.
oil& gas provides specialized
property and liability products and services for customers involved in the
exploration and production of oil and natural gas, including operators and
drilling contractors, as well as various service and supply companies and
manufacturers that support upstream operations. the policies written by this
business group insure drilling rigs, natural gas facilities, and production and
gathering platforms, and cover risks including physical damage, liability and
business interruption.
agribusiness serves small to medium-sized agricultural
businesses, including farms, ranches, wineries and related operations, offering
property and liability coverages other than workers compensation.
target risk underwriting. the following units serve
commercial businesses requiring specialized product underwriting, claims
handling and risk management services:
national property serves large and mid-sized customers,
including retailers, hospitals, colleges and universities, and owners of
industrial parks, office buildings, apartments and amusement parks, covering
losses on buildings, business assets and business interruption exposures.
inland marine provides insurance for goods in transit and
movable objects for customers such as jewelers, museums, contractors and the
transportation industry. builders risk insurance is also offered to customers
during the construction, renovation or repair of buildings and other
structures.
ocean marine serves the marine
transportation industry and related services, as well as other businesses
involved in international trade. the companys product offerings fall under six
main coverage categories: marine liability, cargo, hull and machinery,
protection and indemnity, pleasure craft, and marine property and liability.
excess casualty serves small to mid-sized
commercial businesses, offering mono-line umbrella and excess coverage where
the company does not write the primary casualty coverage, or where other
business units within the company prefer to outsource the underwriting of
umbrella and excess business based on the expertise and/or limit capacity of excess
casualty.
boiler& machinery serves customers ranging from
small commercial firms to fortune 100 companies, offering comprehensive
breakdown coverages for equipment, including property and business interruption
coverages. through the boilerre unit, boiler& machinery also serves
other property casualty carriers that do not have in-house expertise with
reinsurance, underwriting, engineering, claim handling and risk management
services for this type of coverage.
global accounts provides insurance to u.s.
companies with foreign property and liability exposures (home-foreign), and
foreign organizations with property and liability exposures located in the
united states (reverse-flow), as part of a global program.
specialized distribution. the following units market and
underwrite their products to customers predominantly through licensed
wholesale, general and program agents that manage customers uniqsue insurance
requirements.
northland provides insurance coverage for the commercial
transportation industry, and commercial liability and package policies for
small, difficult to place specialty classes of commercial business on an
admitted or excess and surplus lines basis.
national programs offers tailored property and casualty
programs on an admitted basis for customers with common risk characteristics or
coverage requirements. programs available include those for entertainment,
architects and engineers, equipment rental and golf services.
underwriting facilities serves small commercial businesses,
offering general liability, property and commercial auto physical damage
coverages on an admitted or excess and surplus lines basis.
business insurance also
includes the special liability group (which manages the companys asbestos and
environmental liabilities); the assumed reinsurance, health care, and certain
international and other runoff operations; policies written by the companys
gulf operation (gulf), which was placed into runoff during the second quarter
of 2004; and the companys personal catastrophe risk operation, which was sold
in november2005. the personal catastrophe risk operation had been
included in the specialty segment prior to the august2006 segment
realignment. these are collectively referred to as business insurance other. the
personal catastrophe risk operation accounted for the majority of net written
premiums in this category in 2005. in 2004, gulf and the personal catastrophe
risk operation accounted for the majority of written premiums in this category.
selected market and product information
the
following table sets forth business insurance net written premiums by market
and product line for the periods indicated. for a description of the product
lines and markets referred to in the table, see principal markets and methods
of distribution and product lines, respectively.
(fortheyearendeddecember31,inmillions)
%of
total
by market:
select accounts
$
2,663
$
2,722
$
2,555
24.1
%
commercial accounts
2,376
2,330
2,273
21.5
national accounts
1,135
1,230
1,040
10.3
industry-focused underwriting
2,196
2,080
1,747
19.9
target risk underwriting
1,629
1,482
1,345
14.8
specialized distribution
1,022
9.2
total business insurance core
11,021
10,752
9,767
99.8
business insurance other
0.2
total business insurance by market
$
11,046
$
10,999
$
10,374
100.0
%
by product line (1):
commercial multi-peril
$
3,083
$
3,000
$
2,792
27.9
%
workers compensation
2,135
2,080
1,888
19.3
commercial automobile
2,013
2,024
1,987
18.2
property
1,939
1,927
1,742
17.6
general liability
1,857
1,922
1,912
16.8
other
0.2
total
business insurance by product line
$
11,046
$
10,999
$
10,374
100.0
%
(1) the
reporting of spc products was conformed to the companys product definitions
beginning with policy renewals on and after january1, 2005. accordingly,
the amounts reported by product line for 2004 are not comparable with the years
2005 and 2006.
principal markets
and methods of distribution
the business insurance segment distributes its
products through approximately 7,100 independent agencies and brokers located
throughout the united states that are serviced by approximately 90 field
offices and three customer service centers. in recent years, the business
insurance segment has made significant investments in enhanced technology
utilizing internet-based applications to provide real-time interface
capabilities with independent agencies and brokers. business insurance builds
relationships with well-established, independent insurance agencies and
brokers. in selecting new independent agencies and brokers to distribute its
products, business insurance considers each agencys or brokers profitability,
financial stability, staff experience and strategic fit with its operating and
marketing plans. once an agency or broker is appointed, business insurance
carefully monitors its performance.
select accounts is
a leading provider of property casualty products to small businesses. it serves
firms with generally fewer than 50 employees. products offered by select
accounts are guaranteed cost policies, including packaged products covering
property and liability exposures. products are sold through independent agents
and brokers, who are often the same agents and brokers that sell the companys
commercial accounts and personal insurance products.
select accounts offers its independent agents a system
for small businesses that helps them connect all aspects of sales and service
through a comprehensive service platform. components of the platform include
agency automation capabilities and service centers that function as an
extension of an agencys
customer service
operations, both of which are highly utilized by agencies. approximately 4,700
agencies have chosen to take advantage of select accounts service centers,
which offer agencies a wide range of services, including coverage and billing
inquiries, policy changes, the assistance of licensed service professionals and
extended hours of operations.
commercial accounts
sells a broad range of property and casualty insurance products through a large
network of independent agents and brokers. commercial accounts primarily
targets mid-sized businesses with 50 to 1,000 employees. the company offers a full
line of products to its commercial accounts customers with an emphasis on
guaranteed cost programs. each account is underwritten based on the unique risk
characteristics, loss history and coverage needs of the account. the ability to
underwrite at this detailed level allows commercial accounts to have a broad
risk appetite and a diversified customer base.
national accounts
group is comprised of three business units. the largest unit sells a variety of
casualty products and services to large companies. national accounts clients
generally select loss-sensitive products in connection with a large deductible
or self-insured program and, to a lesser extent, a retrospectively rated or a
guaranteed cost insurance policy. through a network of field offices, the companys
underwriting specialists work closely with national and regional brokers to
tailor insurance programs to meet clients needs. workers compensation
accounted for approximately 78% of sales to national accounts customers during
2006, based on direct written premiums and fees. national accounts generated
$346 million of fee income in 2006, excluding commercial residual market
business discussed below.
national accounts includes the companys discover re operation, which
principally provides commercial auto liability, general liability, workers
compensation and property coverages. it serves retail brokers and insureds who
utilize programs such as collateralized deductibles, captive reinsurers and
self-insurance.
in addition, national accounts includes the companys
commercial residual market business. the companys commercial residual market
business sells claims and policy management services to workers compensation
pools throughout the united states. the company services approximately 36% of
the total workers compensation assigned risk market. the company is one of
very few servicing carriers that operate nationally. assigned risk plan
contracts generated $182 million in fee income in 2006.
many national accounts customers require insurance-related
services in addition to or in lieu of pure risk coverage, primarily for workers
compensation and, to a lesser extent, general liability and commercial
automobile exposures. these types of services include risk management services,
such as claims administration, loss control and risk management information
services, and are generally offered in connection with large deductible or
self-insured programs. these services generate fee income rather than net
written premiums.
industry-focused underwriting markets
a wide array of property and casualty products and services tailored to
targeted industry segments. unique marketing and underwriting groups are
focused on individual industry segments of significant size and complexity that
require unique underwriting, claim, risk management or other insurance-related
products and services. the following industry-focused units, which are
described in more detail on pages_-_ of this report, have been
established: construction, technology,
public sector services, oil& gas, and agribusiness.
products are distributed primarily through the same
agents and brokers servicing select accounts and commercial accounts, although
there may be more business with agents that also specialize in servicing the
needs of certain of these industries.
target risk underwriting services
a wide customer base with unique and specialized insurance products and
services. these specialized units have expertise in meeting customers
specialized property and casualty coverage requirements. these units include
national property, inland marine, ocean marine,
excess casualty, boiler&
machinery, and global accounts, which are described in more detail on page_
of this report.
products are distributed primarily through the same
agents and brokers servicing select accounts and commercial accounts, as well
as specialized agents and brokers with expertise in certain of these products.
specialized distribution
distributes admitted and excess and surplus lines property and casualty
products predominantly through selected wholesale agents, both on a brokerage
and managing general underwriting basis, and through selected program agents.
brokers, general agents and program agents operate in certain markets that are
not typically served by the companys appointed retail agents, or they maintain
certain affinity arrangements in specialized market segments. the wholesale
excess and surplus lines market, which is characterized by the absence of rate
and form regulation, allows for more flexibility to write certain classes of
business. in working with wholesale or program agents on a brokerage basis,
specialized distribution underwrites the business and sets the premium level.
in working with wholesale or program agents on a managing general underwriting
or program manager basis, the agents produce and underwrite business that
conforms to underwriting guidelines that have been specifically designed for
each facility or program.
business
insurance other includes the special liability group (which
manages the companys asbestos and environmental liabilities); the assumed
reinsurance, health care, and certain international and other runoff
operations; policies written by gulf, which was placed into runoff during the
second quarter of 2004; and the personal catastrophe risk operation which was
sold in november2005. the personal catastrophe risk operation had been
included in the specialty segment prior to the august2006 segment
realignment. certain business previously written by gulf is now being written
in the specialized distribution market and in the financial, professional&
international insurance segment. gulf provided specialty coverages including
management and professional liability, excess and surplus lines, environmental,
umbrella and fidelity. gulf also provided insurance products specifically
designed for financial institutions, the entertainment industry and sports
organizations.
pricing and
underwriting
pricing levels for business insurance property and
casualty insurance products are generally developed based upon an expectation
of estimated losses, the expenses of producing business and managing claims and
a reasonable allowance for profit. business insurance has a disciplined
approach to underwriting and risk management that emphasizes profitable growth
rather than premium volume or market share.
business insurance has developed an underwriting and
pricing methodology that incorporates underwriting, claims, engineering,
actuarial and product development disciplines for particular industries. this
approach is designed to maintain high quality underwriting and pricing
discipline. it utilizes proprietary data gathered and analyzed with respect to
its business insurance business over many years. the underwriters and engineers
use this information to assess and evaluate risks prior to quotation. this
information provides specialized knowledge about specific industry segments.
this methodology enables business insurance to streamline its risk selection
process and develop pricing parameters that will not compromise its
underwriting integrity.
for smaller businesses,
select accounts uses a process based on industry classifications to allow
agents and field underwriting representatives to make underwriting and pricing
decisions within predetermined classifications, because underwriting criteria
and pricing tend to be more standardized for these smaller exposures.
a portion of business in
this segment is written with large deductible insurance policies. under workers
compensation insurance contracts with deductible features, the company is
obligated to pay the
claimant
the full amount of the claim. the company is subsequently reimbursed by the
contractholder for the deductible amount and is subject to credit risk until
such reimbursement is made. at december31, 2006, contractholder
receivables and payables on unpaid losses associated with large deductible
policies were each approximately $5.01 billion. retrospectively rated policies
are also used for workers compensation coverage. although the retrospectively
rated feature of the policy substantially reduces insurance risk for the
company, it introduces additional credit risk to the company. premium
receivables from holders of retrospectively rated policies totaled
approximately $223 million at december31, 2006. significant collateral,
primarily letters of credit and, to a lesser extent cash collateral trusts and
surety bonds, is generally requested for large deductible plans and/or
retrospectively rated policies that provide for deferred collection of
deductible recoveries and/or ultimate premiums. the amount of collateral
requested is predicated upon the creditworthiness of the customer and the
nature of the insured risks. business insurance continually monitors the credit
exposure on individual accounts and the adequacy of collateral.
the company continually
monitors its exposure to natural and manmade peril catastrophic losses and
attempts to mitigate such exposure. in order to reduce the companys exposure
to catastrophe losses, business insurance limits the writing of new property
business and selectively takes underwriting action on existing business in some
markets. in addition, underwriting standards have been tightened, price
increases have been implemented in some catastrophe-prone areas, and
deductibles are in place in hurricane and wind and hail prone areas. the
company uses various analyses and methods, including sophisticated computer
modeling techniques, to analyze underwriting risks of business in
hurricane-prone, earthquake-prone and target risk areas. the company relies
upon this analysis to make underwriting decisions designed to manage its
exposure on catastrophe-exposed business.
the company also utilizes reinsurance to manage its aggregate exposures
to catastrophes. see reinsurance.
product lines
commercial
multi-peril provides a combination of property and liability
coverage. property insurance covers damages such as those caused by fire, wind,
hail, water, theft and vandalism, and protects businesses from financial loss
due to business interruption resulting from a covered loss. liability coverage
insures businesses against third parties from accidents occurring on their
premises or arising out of their operations, such as injuries sustained from
products sold.
workers
compensation provides coverage for employers for specified
benefits payable under state or federal law for workplace injuries to
employees. there are typically four types of benefits payable under workers
compensation policies: medical benefits, disability benefits, death benefits
and vocational rehabilitation benefits. the company emphasizes managed care
cost containment strategies, which involve employers, employees and care
providers in a cooperative effort that focuses on the injured employees early
return to work, cost-effective quality care and customer service in this
market. the company offers the following three types of workers compensation
products:
guaranteed
cost insurance products, in which policy premium charges are fixed for the
period of coverage and do not vary as a result of the insureds loss
experience;
loss-sensitive
insurance products, including large deductible and retrospectively rated
policies, in which fees or premiums are adjusted based on actual loss
experience of the insured during the policy period; and
service
programs, which are generally sold to the companys national accounts
customers, where the company receives fees rather than premiums for providing
loss prevention, risk management, and claim and benefit administration services
to organizations under service agreements. the company also participates in
state assigned risk pools as a servicing carrier and pool participant.
commercial automobile
provides coverage for businesses against losses incurred from personal bodily
injury, bodily injury to third parties, property damage to an insureds vehicle
and property damage to other vehicles and other property resulting from the ownership,
maintenance or use of automobiles and trucks in a business.
property provides
coverage for loss or damage to buildings, inventory and equipment from natural
disasters, including hurricanes, windstorms, earthquakes, hail, and severe
winter weather. also covered are manmade events such as theft, vandalism,
fires, explosions, terrorism and financial loss due to business interruption
resulting from covered property damage. for additional information on terrorism
coverages, see reinsuranceterrorism risk insurance act of 2002 and terrorism
risk insurance extension act of 2005. property also includes specialized
equipment insurance, which provides coverage for loss or damage resulting from
the mechanical breakdown of boilers and machinery, and ocean and inland marine,
which provides coverage for goods in transit and unique, one-of-a-kind
exposures.
general
liability provides coverage for liability exposures including
bodily injury and property damage arising from products sold and general
business operations. specialized liability policies may also include coverage
for directors and officers liability arising in their official capacities,
employment practices liability insurance, fiduciary liability for trustees and
sponsors of pension, health and welfare, and other employee benefit plans,
errors and omissions insurance for employees, agents, professionals and others
arising from acts or failures to act under specified circumstances, as well as
umbrella and excess insurance. errors and omissions insurance for professionals
(such as lawyers, accountants, doctors and other health care providers) is
sometimes also known as professional liability insurance.
net retention
policy
the following discussion
reflects the companys retention policy as of january1, 2007. for third
party liability, business insurance generally limits its net retention to a
maximum of $13 million per insured, per occurrence after reinsurance. the net
retained amount per risk for property exposures is generally limited to $15
million, after reinsurance. the company also utilizes facultative reinsurance
to provide additional limits capacity or to reduce retentions on an individual
risk basis. the company may also retain amounts greater than those described
herein based upon the individual characteristics of the risk.
geographic
distribution
the
following table shows the distribution of business insurances direct written
premiums for the states that accounted for the majority of premium volume for
the year ended december31, 2006:
state
%of
total
california
12.1
%
new york
7.9
texas
7.3
florida
5.7
illinois
4.6
new jersey
4.1
massachusetts
4.1
pennsylvania
3.8
all others(1)
50.4
total
100.0
%
(1) no
other single state accounted for 3.0% or more of the total direct written
premiums written in 2006 by the domestic operations of the business insurance
segment.
competition
the insurance industry is represented in the
commercial marketplace by many insurance companies of varying size as well as
other entities offering risk alternatives such as self-insured retentions or
captive programs. market competition works within the insurance regulatory
framework to set the price charged for insurance products and the level of
service provided. growth is driven by a companys ability to provide insurance
and services at a price that is reasonable and acceptable to the customer. in
addition, the marketplace is affected by available capacity of the insurance
industry, as measured by policyholders surplus, and the availability of
reinsurance. surplus expands and contracts primarily in conjunction with profit
levels generated by the industry. capital raised by debt and equity offerings
also increases a companys surplus. growth in premium and service business is
also measured by a companys ability to retain existing customers and to
attract new customers. additionally, many large commercial customers
self-insure their risks or utilize large deductibles on purchased insurance.
select accounts business is typically written through
independent agents and, to a lesser extent, regional brokers and direct
writers. both national and regional property casualty insurance companies
compete in the select accounts market which generally comprises lower hazard, main
street business customers. risks are underwritten and priced using standard
industry practices and a combination of proprietary and standard industry
product offerings. competition in this market is primarily based on price,
product offerings and response time in policy services. select accounts has
established a strong marketing relationship with its distribution network and
has provided it with defined underwriting policies, a broad array of products,
competitive prices and one of the most efficient automated environments in the
industry. in addition, the company has established centralized service centers
to help agents perform many service functions, in return for a fee. select
accounts overall service platform is one of the strongest in the small
business commercial market.
commercial accounts
business has historically been written through independent agents and brokers,
although some companies use direct writing. competitors in this market are
primarily national property casualty insurance companies willing to write most
classes of business using traditional products and pricing, and regional
insurance companies. companies compete on price, product offerings, response
time in policy issuance and claim and loss prevention services. additionally,
improved efficiency through automation and response time to customer needs are
key to success in this market.
the national
accounts group is comprised of three business units:
national
accounts business is typically written through national brokers and, to a
lesser extent, regional brokers. insurance companies compete in this market
based on price, product offerings, claim and loss prevention services, managed
care cost containment and risk management information systems. national
accounts also offers a large nationwide network of localized claim service
centers which provide greater flexibility in claims adjusting and allows
national accounts to more quickly respond to the needs of its customers.
discover
re competes with traditional providers of commercial insurance coverages, as
well as other underwriters of property and casualty insurance in the
alternative risk transfer market, such as risk retention groups, self-insurance
plans, captives managed by others, and a variety of other risk-financing
vehicles and mechanisms.
national
accounts residual market business competes for state contracts to provide
claims and policy management services. these contracts, which generally have
three-year terms, are selected by state agencies through a bid process based on
the quality of service and price. national accounts services approximately 36%
of the total workers compensation assigned risk market, making the company one
of the largest servicing carriers in the industry.
there are several other
business groups in business insurance that compete in focused target markets.
each of these markets is different and requires unique combinations of industry
knowledge, proprietary coverage forms, specialized risk control and loss
handling services, and partnerships with agents and brokers that also focus on
these markets. in some cases the competition is national carriers with
similarly dedicated underwriting and marketing groups. in other cases, smaller
regional companies tend to be the primary competition. in either case, these
businesses have regional structures that allow them to deliver personalized
service and local knowledge to their customer base. specialized agents and
brokers, including managing general agents and wholesale agents, supplement
this strategy. in all of these businesses, the competitive strategy is market
leadership attained through focused industry knowledge applied to insurance and
risk needs.
financial,
professional& international insurance
the financial,
professional& international insurance segment includes surety and
financial liability coverages, which require a primarily credit-based
underwriting process, as well as property and casualty products that are
primarily marketed on an international basis. the segment includes the
following businesses:
bond& financial products provides
a wide range of customers with bond and insurance products and risk management
services. the range of coverages includes surety and fidelity bonds for
construction and general commercial enterprises, professional liability and
management liability for public corporations, private companies and
not-for-profit organizations for losses caused by the negligence or misconduct
of named directors and officers; professional liability for a variety of
professionals, such as lawyers, design professionals and real estate agents for
liability from errors and omissions committed in the course of professional
conduct or practice; and a full range of property, auto, liability, fidelity
and professional/management liability insurance for financial institutions.
this business represents the fourth quarter 2006 combination of the companys
previous bond and financial&
professional services marketing groups.
in december2006, the
company reached a definitive agreement to sell its mexican surety subsidiary,
afianzadora insurgentes, s.a. de c.v., which accounted for $79 million of net
written premiums in 2006. the impact of this transaction will not be material
to the companys results of operations or financial condition.
international
and lloyds includes coverages marketed to and underwritten for
several customer groups within the united kingdom, canada and the republic of
ireland and business written as a corporate member at lloyds. international offers specialized insurance and risk
management services to several customer groups, including those in the
technology, public services, and financial and professional services industry
sectors. international primarily underwrites
employers liability (similar to workers compensation coverage in the united
states), public and product liability (the equivalent of general liability),
professional indemnity (similar to professional liability coverage), motor
(similar to automobile coverage in the united states) and property exposures. the
company underwrites four principal lines of businessaviation, marine, global
property, and accident and special risksthrough its lloyds syndicate
(syndicate 5000), for which the company provides 100% of the capital. during
the second half of 2004, the company made a decision to exit certain portions
of the lloyds personal lines business and, in early 2005, sold the right to
renew this business as well as the operating companies that supported it.
selected market and
product information
the following table sets
forth financial, professional& international insurance net written
premiums by market and product line for the periods indicated. for a
description of the markets and product lines referred to in the table, see principal
markets and methods of distribution and product lines, respectively.
(fortheyearendeddecember31,inmillions)
%oftotal
by market:
bond& financial products
$
2,255
$
2,117
$
1,819
66.5
%
international and lloyds
1,138
1,042
33.5
total financial, professional& international
insurance by market
$
3,393
$
3,159
$
2,708
100.0
%
by product line:
fidelity and surety
$
1,125
$
1,026
$
33.2
%
general liability
1,006
29.6
international
1,138
1,042
33.5
other
3.7
total
financial,
professional& international
insurance by product line
$
3,393
$
3,159
$
2,708
100.0
%
principal markets
and methods of distribution
within the financial, professional&
international insurance segment, bond& financial products distributes
the majority of its products in the united states through approximately 6,400
of the same independent agencies and brokers that distribute the business
insurance segments products. these brokers and independent agencies are
located throughout the united states. bond& financial products, in
conjunction with the business insurance segment, is making significant
investments in enhanced technology utilizing internet-based applications to
provide real-time interface capabilities with its independent agencies and
brokers. bond& financial products builds relationships with
well-established, independent insurance agencies and brokers. in selecting new
independent agencies and brokers to distribute its products, bond&
financial products considers each agencys or brokers profitability, financial
stability, staff experience and strategic fit with its operating and marketing
plans. once an agency or broker is appointed, its ongoing performance is
monitored. in addition, bond& financial products sells its surety
products through independent agents using subsidiaries in mexico, canada and
the united kingdom. the company has reached a definitive agreement to sell its
mexican subsidiary.
the international and
lloyds market distributes its products through brokers in the domestic markets
of each of the three countries in which it operates, the united kingdom, canada
and the republic of ireland. it also writes business at lloyds, where its
products are distributed through lloyds wholesale and retail brokers. by
virtue of lloyds worldwide licenses, financial, professional&
international insurance has access to international markets across the world.
pricing and underwriting
pricing levels for financial, professional&
international insurance property and casualty insurance products are generally
developed based upon an expectation of the frequency and severity of estimated
losses, the expenses of producing business and managing claims, and a
reasonable allowance for profit. financial, professional&
international insurance has a disciplined approach to underwriting and risk
management that emphasizes profitable growth rather than premium volume or
market share.
financial, professional&
international insurance has developed an underwriting and pricing methodology
that incorporates dedicated underwriting, claims, engineering, actuarial and
product development disciplines. this approach is designed to maintain high quality
underwriting and pricing discipline, based on an in-depth knowledge of the
specific account or industry issues. the underwriters use proprietary data
gathered and analyzed over many years to assess and evaluate risks prior to
quotation, and then use proprietary forms to tailor insurance coverage to
insureds within the target markets. this methodology enables financial,
professional& international insurance to streamline its risk
selection process and develop pricing parameters that will not compromise its
underwriting integrity.
the company continually
monitors its exposure to natural and manmade peril catastrophic losses and
attempts to mitigate such exposure. in order to reduce the companys exposure
to catastrophe losses, financial, professional & international insurance
limits the writing of new commercial property and energy and marine business
and selectively takes underwriting action on existing business in some markets.
in addition, underwriting standards have been tightened, price increases have
been implemented in some catastrophe-prone areas, and deductibles are in place
in hurricane and wind and hail prone areas. the company uses various analyses
and methods, including sophisticated computer modeling techniques, to analyze
underwriting risks of business in hurricane-prone, earthquake-prone and target
risk areas. the company relies upon this analysis to make underwriting
decisions designed to manage its exposure on catastrophe-exposed business. the company also utilizes reinsurance to
manage its aggregate exposures to catastrophes.
see reinsurance.
product lines
fidelity
and surety provides fidelity insurance coverage, which
protects an insured for loss due to embezzlement or misappropriation of funds
by an employee, and surety, which is a three-party agreement whereby the
insurer agrees to pay a third party or make complete an obligation in response
to the default, acts or omissions of an insured. surety is generally provided
for construction performance, legal matters such as appeals, trustees in
bankruptcy and probate and other performance bonds. in addition to the business
written in the united states, this product line includes surety business
written in the following subsidiaries of the company: st. paul guarantee
(canada), afianzadora insurgentes (mexico) and st. paul travelers casualty and
surety company of europe (united kingdom). the company has reached a definitive
agreement to sell afianzadora insurgentes.
general
liability provides coverage for liability exposures including
bodily injury and property damage arising from products sold and general
business operations. specialized liability policies may also include coverage
for directors and officers liability arising in their official capacities,
employment practices liability insurance, fiduciary liability for trustees and
sponsors of pension, health and welfare, and other employee benefit plans,
errors and omissions insurance for employees, agents, professionals and others
arising from acts or failures to act under specified circumstances, as well as
umbrella and excess insurance. errors and omissions insurance for professionals
(such as lawyers, accountants, doctors and other health care providers) is
sometimes also known as professional liability insurance.
international
provides coverage through operations in the united kingdom, canada and the
republic of ireland, and at lloyds. the coverage provided in those markets
includes employers liability (similar to workers compensation coverage in the
united states), public and product liability (the equivalent of general
liability), professional indemnity (similar to professional liability
coverage), motor (similar to automobile coverage in the united states) and
property. while the covered hazards may be similar to those in the u.s. market,
the different legal environments can make the product risks and coverage terms
potentially very different from those in the united states.
other coverages
include property, workers compensation, commercial automobile and commercial
multi-peril, which are described in more detail in the business insurance
section of this narrative.
net retention
policy
the following discussion
reflects the companys retention policy as of january1, 2007. for third
party liability, including but not limited to umbrella liability, professional
liability, directors and officers liability, and employment practices
liability, financial, professional& international insurance generally
limits the net retentions up to $11.5 million per policy after reinsurance. for
surety protection, the company generally retains up to $24.5 million probable
maximum loss (pml) per principal but may retain higher amounts based on the
type of obligation, credit quality and other credit risk factors. in the
international and lloyds operations, per risk retentions range from $3 million
to $10 million. the company also utilizes facultative reinsurance to provide
additional limits capacity or to reduce retentions on an individual risk basis.
the company may also retain amounts greater than those described herein based
upon the individual characteristics of the risk.
geographic
distribution
the
following table shows the distribution of financial, professional&
internationals direct written premiums for the states, or for locations
outside of the united states, that accounted for the majority of premium volume
for the year ended december31, 2006:
state
%of
total
california
5.8
%
new york
5.3
texas
4.1
florida
3.7
illinois
3.1
all other
domestic(1)
44.2
total domestic
66.2
total international
33.8
total
100.0
%
(1) no
other single state within the united states accounted for 3.0% or more of the
total direct written premiums written in 2006 by the financial, professional&
international insurance segment.
competition
the competitive landscape in which the financial,
professional& international insurance segment operates is affected by
many of the same factors described previously for the business insurance
segment. bond& financial products competes with other stock
companies, mutual companies, alternative risk sharing groups and other
underwriting organizations. competitors in this market are primarily national
property and casualty insurance companies willing to write most classes of
business using traditional products and pricing and, to a lesser extent,
regional insurance companies and companies that have developed niche programs
for specific industry segments. in addition, many large commercial customers
self-insure their risks or utilize large deductibles on purchased insurance.
bond& financial
products underwrites and markets its products to national, mid-sized and small
businesses and organizations, as well as individuals, and distributes them
through both national and wholesale brokers, regional brokers, and retail
agents. bond& financial products competes in the competitive surety
and management liability marketplaces, as well as offering general property and
casualty coverages to financial institutions. both national and regional
property casualty insurance companies compete with bond& financial
products. its reputation for timely and consistent decision-making, a
nationwide network of local underwriting, claims and industry experts and
strong producer and
customer
relationships, as well as its ability to offer its customers a full range of
products, provides bond& financial products an advantage over many of
its competitors and enables it to compete effectively in a complex, dynamic
marketplace. the ability of bond& financial products to cross-sell
its products to customers of the business insurance and personal insurance
segments provides further competitive advantages for the company.
international competes with numerous international and
local country insurers in the united kingdom, canada and the republic of
ireland. companies compete on the basis of price, product offerings and the
level of claim and risk management services provided. the company has developed
expertise in various markets in these countries similar to those served in the
united states and provides both property and casualty coverage for these
markets. products are generally distributed through a relatively small broker
base whose customer groups align with the companys targeted markets.
at lloyds, the company
competes with other syndicates operating in the lloyds market as well as
international and domestic insurers in the various markets where the company
writes business worldwide. lloyds syndicates are increasingly capitalized by
corporate capital, much of which is provided by large international insurance
enterprises. competition is again based on price and product offerings. the
company has an exclusive focus on lines it believes it can underwrite
effectively and profitably with an emphasis on short-tail insurance lines. the
company underwrites through four principal lines of business at lloyds:
aviation, marine, global property, and accident and special risks.
personal insurance
personal insurance writes virtually all types of
property and casualty insurance covering personal risks. the primary coverages
in personal insurance are automobile and homeowners insurance sold to
individuals. these products are distributed through independent agents,
sponsoring organizations such as employee and affinity groups, and joint marketing
arrangements with other insurers.
in january2007, the
company reached a definitive agreement to sell its subsidiary, mendota
insurance company and its wholly-owned subsidiaries, mendakota insurance
company and mendota insurance agency,inc. these subsidiaries primarily
offered nonstandard automobile coverage and accounted for approximately $187
million of net written premium volume in 2006. the sale is not expected to be
material to the companys results of operations or financial condition.
selected product
and distribution channel information
the
following table sets forth net written premiums for personal insurance by
product line for the periods indicated. for a description of the product lines
referred to in the accompanying table, see product lines. in addition, see principal
markets and methods of distribution for a discussion of distribution channels
for personal insurances product lines.
(fortheyearendeddecember31,inmillions)
%oftotal
by product line:
personal automobile
$
3,692
$
3,477
$
3,433
55.0
%
homeowners and other
3,019
2,751
2,496
45.0
total personal
insurance
$
6,711
$
6,228
$
5,929
100.0
%
principal markets and methods of distribution
personal insurance
products are distributed primarily through approximately 8,700 independent
agents located throughout the united states, supported by personnel in eleven
marketing regions, three single state companies and six service centers. in
selecting new independent agencies to distribute its products, personal
insurance considers each agencys profitability, financial stability, staff
experience and strategic fit with personal insurances operating and marketing
plans. once an agency is appointed, personal insurance carefully monitors its
performance. while the principal markets for personal insurances insurance
products are in states along the east coast, in the south and texas, personal
insurance is expanding its geographic presence across the united states.
personal insurance
operates single state companies in massachusetts, new jersey and florida with
products marketed primarily through independent agents. these states
represented approximately 19% of personal insurance direct written premiums in
2006. the companies were established to manage complex markets in massachusetts
and new jersey and property catastrophe exposure in florida. each company has
dedicated resources in underwriting, claim, finance, legal and service
functions.
personal insurance uses a
consistent operating model with agents outside of the single state companies
(see discussion above). the model provides technological alternatives to agents
to maximize their ease of doing business. personal insurance agents quote and
issue approximately 99% of personal insurances policies directly from their
agencies by leveraging either their own agency management system or using
personal insurances proprietary quote and issuance systems which allows agents
to rate, quote and issue policies on line. all of these quote and issue
platforms interface with personal insurances underwriting and rating systems,
which edit transactions for compliance with personal insurances underwriting
and pricing programs. business processed by agents on these platforms is
subject to consultative review by personal insurances in-house underwriters.
personal insurance also provides a download capability that refreshes the
individual agency system databases of approximately 6,000 agents each day with
updated policy information.
personal insurance
continues to develop functionality to provide its agents with a comprehensive
array of online service capabilities packaged together in an easy-to-use agency
service portal, including customer service, marketing and claim functionality.
agencies can also choose to shift the ongoing service responsibility for
personal insurances customers to one of the companys four customer care
centers, where the company renders customer service on behalf of an agency by
providing a comprehensive array of direct customer service needs, including
response to billing and coverage inquiries, and policy changes. approximately 1,300
agents take advantage of this service alternative.
personal insurance also
markets through additional distribution channels, including sponsoring
organizations such as employers and consumer associations, and joint marketing
arrangements with other insurers. personal insurance handles the sales and
service for these programs either through a sponsoring independent agent or
through two of the companys call center locations. a number of well-known
corporations make the companys product offerings available to their employees
primarily through a payroll deduction payment process. the company has
significant relationships with the majority of the american automobile
association (aaa) clubs in the united states and other affinity groups that
make available personal insurances product offerings to their members. since
1995, the company has had a marketing agreement with geico to underwrite
homeowners business for their auto customers. this agreement has added
profitable business and helped to geographically diversify the homeowners line
of business.
pricing and underwriting
pricing levels for
personal insurance property and casualty insurance products are generally
developed based upon an expectation of estimated losses, the expense of
producing, issuing and servicing
the
business and a reasonable allowance for profit and contingencies. the company
has a disciplined approach to underwriting and risk management that emphasizes
profitable growth rather than premium volume or market share.
personal insurance has
developed a product management methodology that integrates the disciplines of
underwriting, claim, actuarial and product development. this approach is
designed to maintain high quality underwriting discipline and pricing
segmentation. proprietary data is analyzed with respect to personal insurances
business over many years. personal insurance uses a variety of proprietary and
vendor produced risk differentiation models to facilitate its pricing
segmentation. personal insurances product managers establish strict
underwriting guidelines integrated with its filed pricing and rating plans,
which enable personal insurance to streamline its risk selection and pricing
processes.
pricing for personal
automobile insurance is driven by changes in the frequency of claims and by
inflation in the cost of automobile repairs, medical care and litigation of
liability claims. as a result, the profitability of the business is largely
dependent on promptly identifying and rectifying disparities between premium
levels and projected claim costs, and obtaining approval from state regulatory
authorities when necessary for filed rate changes.
pricing in the homeowners
business is also driven by changes in the frequency of claims and by inflation
in the cost of building supplies, labor and household possessions. most
homeowners policies offer, but do not require, automatic increases in coverage
to reflect growth in replacement costs and property values. in addition to the
normal risks associated with any multiple peril coverage, the profitability and
pricing of homeowners insurance is affected by the incidence of natural
disasters, particularly those related to weather and earthquakes. in order to
reduce the companys exposure to catastrophe losses, personal insurance limits
the writing of new homeowners business and selectively takes underwriting
action on existing business in some markets. in addition, underwriting
standards have been tightened, price increases have been implemented in some catastrophe-prone
areas, and deductibles are in place in hurricane and wind and hail prone areas.
personal insurance uses computer-modeling techniques to assess its level of
exposure to loss in hurricane and earthquake catastrophe-prone areas. changes
to methods of marketing and underwriting in some jurisdictions are subject to
state-imposed restrictions, which can make it more difficult for an insurer to
significantly reduce catastrophe exposures.
insurers writing personal
lines property and casualty policies may be unable to increase prices until
some time after the costs associated with coverage have increased, primarily
because of state insurance rate regulation. the pace at which an insurer can
change rates in response to increased costs depends, in part, on whether the
applicable state law requires prior approval of rate increases or notification
to the regulator either before or after a rate change is imposed. in states
with prior approval laws, rates must be approved by the regulator before being
used by the insurer. in states having file-and-use laws, the insurer must
file rate changes with the regulator, but does not need to wait for approval
before using the new rates. a use-and-file law requires an insurer to file
rates within a period of time after the insurer begins using the new rate.
approximately one-half of the states require prior approval of most rate
changes. the companys ability or willingness to raise prices, modify
underwriting terms or reduce exposure to certain geographies may be limited due
to considerations of public policy, the evolving political environment and/or
social responsibilities. the company also may choose to write business it might
not otherwise write for strategic purposes, such as improving access to other
underwriting opportunities.
independent agents either
utilize one of the companys automated quote and issue systems or they submit
applications to the companys service centers for underwriting review, quote,
and issuance. automated transactions are edited by the companys systems and
issued if they conform to established guidelines. exceptions are reviewed by
underwriters in the companys business centers. audits are conducted by
business center underwriters and agency managers, on a systematic sampling
basis, across all of the companys independent agency generated business. each
agent is assigned to a specific employee or
team of
employees responsible for working with the agent on business plan development,
marketing, and overall growth and profitability. the company uses agency level
management information to analyze and understand results and to identify
problems and opportunities.
the personal insurance
products sold through additional marketing channels utilize the same quote and
issuance systems discussed previously and exceptions are underwritten by the
companys employees. underwriters work with company management on business plan
development, marketing, and overall growth and profitability. channel-specific
production and claim information is used to analyze results and identify
problems and opportunities.
product lines
the primary coverages in
personal insurance are personal automobile and homeowners insurance sold to
individuals. personal insurance had approximately 7.1 million policies in force
at december31, 2006.
personal
automobile provides coverage for liability to others for both
bodily injury and property damage and for physical damage to an insureds own
vehicle from collision and various other perils. in addition, many states
require policies to provide first-party personal injury protection, frequently
referred to as no-fault coverage.
homeowners
and other provides protection against losses to dwellings and
contents from a wide variety of perils, as well as coverage for liability
arising from ownership or occupancy. the company writes homeowners insurance
for dwellings, condominiums and rental property contents. the company also
writes coverage for personal watercraft, personal articles such as jewelry, and
umbrella liability protection.
net retention policy
the following discussion
reflects the companys retention policy as of january1, 2007. personal
insurance retains the first $5 million of umbrella policies and purchases
facultative reinsurance for limits over $5 million. for personal property
insurance, there is a $6 million maximum retention per risk. the company also
utilizes facultative reinsurance to provide additional limits capacity or to
reduce retentions on an individual risk basis. the company may also retain
amounts greater than those described herein based upon the individual
characteristics of the risk
geographic distribution
the
following table shows the distribution of personal insurances direct written
premiums for the states that accounted for the majority of premium volume for
the year ended december31, 2006:
state
%of
total
new york
15.4
%
texas
9.3
pennsylvania
7.1
massachusetts
6.4
florida
6.1
new jersey
6.1
georgia
4.6
virginia
4.5
connecticut
4.5
california
4.2
maryland
3.2
all others(1)
28.6
total
100.0
%
(1) no
other single state accounted for 3.0% or more of the total direct written
premiums written in 2006 by the personal insurance segment.
competition
personal lines insurance
is written by hundreds of insurance companies of varying sizes. although
national companies write the majority of the business, personal insurance also
faces competition from local and regional companies which often have a
competitive advantage because of their knowledge of the local marketplace and
their relationship with local agents. personal insurance believes that the
principal competitive factors are price, service, perceived stability of the
insurer and name recognition. personal insurance competes for business within
each independent agency since these agencies also offer policies of competing
companies. at the agency level, competition is primarily based on price and the
level of service, including claims handling, as well as the level of automation
and the development of long-term relationships with individual agents. personal
insurance also competes with insurance companies that use exclusive agents or
salaried employees to sell their products. in addition to its traditional
independent agency distribution, personal insurance has broadened its
distribution of products by marketing to sponsoring organizations, including
employee and affinity groups, and through joint marketing arrangements with
other insurers. personal insurance believes that its continued focus on underwriting
and pricing segmentation, claim settlement effectiveness strategies and expense
management practices enable personal insurance to price its products
competitively in all of its distribution channels.
claims management
the
companys claims management strategies, together with its focus on optimizing
claim outcomes, cost efficiency and service are critical to the companys
ability to grow profitably and reflect these core tenets:
fair,
efficient, fact-based claims management processes;
use
of advanced technology provides front-line claim professionals with necessary
information and facilitates prompt claim resolution;
specialization
of claim professionals and segmentation of claims by complexity, as indicated
by severity, coverage and causation, allow the company to focus its resources
effectively;
effective
collaboration, using meaningful management information, across all divisions
within the company facilitates product analysis and enhances risk selection and
risk pricing; and
excellent
customer service enhances customer retention.
the companys claims
function is managed through its claim services operations. with nearly 13,000
employees, claim services employs a diverse group of professionals, including
claim adjusters, appraisers, attorneys, investigators, engineers, accountants,
system specialists and training, management and support personnel. approved
external service providers, such as independent adjusters and appraisers,
investigators and attorneys, are available for use as appropriate.
field claim management
teams located in 29 claim centers and 89 satellite and specialty-only offices
in 46 states are organized to maintain focus on the specific claim
characteristics unique to the businesses within the business insurance,
financial, professional& international insurance, and personal
insurance segments. claim teams with specialized skills, resources, and
workflows are matched to the unique exposures of those businesses with local
claim management dedicated to achieving optimal results within each segment.
the companys home office operations provide additional support in the form of
workflow design, quality management, information technology, advanced
management information and data analysis, training, financial reporting and
control, and human resources strategy. in addition to the field teams, claim
staff is dedicated to each of personal insurances single state companies in
florida, massachusetts and new jersey. this structure permits the company to
maintain the economies of scale of a larger, established company while
retaining the agility to respond promptly to the needs of customers, brokers,
agents and underwriters. claims management for international is generally
provided locally by staff in the respective international location due to local
knowledge of applicable laws and regulations.
an integral part of the
companys strategy to benefit customers and shareholders is its continuing
industry leadership in the fight against insurance fraud through its
investigative services unit. the company has a nationwide staff of experts that
investigate a wide array of insurance fraud schemes using in-house forensic
resources and other technological tools. this staff also has specialized
expertise in fire scene examinations, medical provider fraud schemes and data
mining. the company also dedicates investigative resources to ensure that
violations of law are reported to and prosecuted by law enforcement agencies.
claim services uses
advanced technology, management information, and data analysis to assist the
company in reviewing its claim practices and results to evaluate and improve
its performance. the companys claim management strategy is focused on
segmentation of claims and appropriate technical specialization to drive
effective claim resolution. the company continually monitors its investment in
claim resources to maintain an effective focus on claim outcomes and a
disciplined approach to continual improvement. in recent years, the company has
invested significant additional resources in many of its claim handling
operations and routinely monitors the effect of its investments to ensure a
consistent optimization between outcomes, cost, and service.
during 2006, claim
services refined its catastrophic response strategy to increase the companys
ability to respond to a significant catastrophic event using its own personnel,
placing less reliance on independent adjustors and appraisers. the company
established a larger dedicated catastrophe response team, and trained a larger
enterprise response team of existing company employees who can be deployed on
short notice in the event of a catastrophe that generates claim volume exceeding
the capacity of the dedicated catastrophe response team.
the company is also a
leader in bringing effective claim solutions that provide superior customer
service. one example of this is conciergeclaimsm, a new auto claim service
that features selected
independently-owned
auto repair facilities with company appraisers on site to complete an estimate,
handle all rental arrangements and monitor the repair process from start to
finish. by managing the claim in this way, the company can help ensure prompt,
quality results and create a differentiated, superior claim experience for
customers.
another strategic
advantage is travcompsm,
a workers compensation claim resolution and medical management program that
assists adjusters in the prompt investigation and effective management of
workers compensation claims. innovative medical and claims management
technologies permit nurse, medical and claims professionals to share
appropriate vital information that supports prompt investigation, effective
return to work and claim resolution strategies. these technologies, together
with effective matching of professional skills and authority to specific claim
issues, have resulted in more efficient management of workers compensation
claims with lower medical, wage replacement costs and loss adjustment expenses.
reinsurance
the company reinsures a
portion of the risks it underwrites in order to control its exposure to losses.
the company cedes to reinsurers a portion of these risks and pays premiums
based upon the risk and exposure of the policies subject to such reinsurance.
ceded reinsurance involves credit risk, except with regard to mandatory pools,
and is generally subject to aggregate loss limits. although the reinsurer is
liable to the company to the extent of the reinsurance ceded, the company
remains liable as the direct insurer on all risks reinsured. reinsurance
recoverables are reported after reductions for known insolvencies and after
allowances for uncollectible amounts. the company also holds collateral, including
trust agreements, escrow funds and letters of credit, under certain reinsurance
agreements. the company monitors the financial condition of reinsurers on an
ongoing basis and reviews its reinsurance arrangements periodically. reinsurers
are selected based on their financial condition, business practices and the
price of their product offerings. for additional information concerning
reinsurance, see note 4 of notes to the companys consolidated financial
statements.
the
company utilizes a variety of reinsurance agreements to manage its exposure to
large property and casualty losses, including:
facultative
reinsurance, in which reinsurance is provided for all or a portion of the
insurance provided by a single policy and each policy reinsured is separately
negotiated;
treaty
reinsurance, in which reinsurance is provided for a specified type or category
of risks; and
catastrophe
reinsurance, in which the company is indemnified for an amount of loss in
excess of a specified retention with respect to losses resulting from a
catastrophic event.
for a
description of reinsurance-related litigation, see item 3, legal proceedings.
catastrophe reinsurance
catastrophes can be caused
by various natural and man-made events including hurricanes, windstorms,
earthquakes, hail, severe winter weather, explosions and fires. the incidence
and severity of catastrophes are inherently unpredictable. the extent of losses
from a catastrophe is a function of both the total amount of insured exposure
in the area affected by the event and the severity of the event. most
catastrophes are restricted to small geographic areas; however, hurricanes and
earthquakes may produce significant damage in larger areas, especially those
that are heavily populated. the company generally seeks to reduce its exposure
to catastrophes through individual risk selection and the purchase of
catastrophe reinsurance.
the
company utilizes reinsurance agreements with nonaffiliated reinsurers to manage
its exposure to losses resulting from one occurrence. the companys general
catastrophe reinsurance treaty covers the
accumulation of net property losses arising out of one
occurrence. the coverage provided under the general catastrophe reinsurance
treaty, effective for the time period indicated, is as follows:
layer of loss
july1, 2006 - june30, 2007 reinsurance
coverage in-force
$0 - $1.0 billion
loss retained by
the company
$1.0 billion - $1.50billion
72.4% ($362 million) of
loss retained by the company; 27.6% ($138 million) of loss covered by
catastrophe treaty
$1.50 billion - $2.25billion
44.0% ($330
million) of loss retained by the company; 56.0% ($420 million) of loss
covered by catastrophe treaty
greater than $2.25billion
loss 100% retained by
the company
this agreement excludes nuclear, chemical, biochemical
and radiological losses and all terrorism losses as defined by the terrorism
risk insurance act of 2002 and the terrorism risk insurance extension act of
2005. the agreement covers all of the companysexposures inthe
united states and canada and their possessions and waters contiguous thereto,
the caribbean and mexico. for business underwritten in canada, the united
kingdom, republic of ireland and in the companys operations at lloyds,
separate reinsurance protections are purchased locally that have lower net
retentions more commensurate with the size of the respective local balance
sheet. the company conducts an ongoing review of its risk and catastrophe
coverages and makes changes as it deems appropriate.
in addition to its general
catastrophe treaty, the company also is party to a northeast general
catastrophe treaty providing $500 million of coverage, subject to a $2.25
billion retention, for losses arising from hurricanes, earthquakes and winter
storm or freeze losses from virginia to maine, and waters contiguous thereto.
losses from a covered event (occurring over several days) anywhere in the united
states may be used to satisfy the retention.
florida hurricane catastrophe fund
(fhcf)
the company participates
in the fhcf, which is a state-mandated catastrophe reinsurance fund that
provides reimbursement to insurers for a portion of their residential
catastrophic hurricane losses. the fhcf is primarily funded by premiums from
insurance companies that write residential property business in florida and, if
insufficient, assessments on all florida
property and casualty lines of business, excluding accident and health,
the national flood insurance program, workers compensation and medical
malpractice insurance. the fhcfs resources are limited to these contributions
and to its borrowing capacity at the time of a significant catastrophe in
florida. based on current expected reimbursements for 2004 and 2005 losses, the
state of florida levied a 1% assessment effective january1, 2007 for all
of the companys relevant policyholders as discussed above. the company holds
no liability for this pass-through assessment, since the company is only liable
for the assessments collected from insureds. prior to the special legislative
session in florida in january2007, the projected fhcf bonding for future
events was adequate to cover its statutory capacity. in january2007, the
governor of florida signed into law legislation which expanded the capacity of
the fhcf from $16 billion to $28 billion, with an option for the fhcf board of
governors to add an additional $4 billion of capacity. additionally,
participating companies have the option to select lower attachment points to
the fhcf in $1 billion increments ranging from $6 billion to $3 billion. as a
result, the maximum potential industry capacity has been increased from
approximately $16 billion to $35 billion for a single hurricane event impacting
florida residential property exposures. the companys participation as of
june2006 (the most recent date for which data is available) accounted for
less than 0.8% of the fhcf. this additional capacity is also funded primarily
by premiums and relies on the same assessment and borrowing process described
above. if there are hurricanes in 2007, the cash resources of the fhcf may not
be sufficient to meet its obligations and continuing assessments may be
necessary.
terrorism risk insurance act of 2002
and terrorism risk insurance extension act of 2005
on november26, 2002, the terrorism risk
insurance act of 2002 (the terrorism act) was enacted into federal law and
established the terrorism risk insurance program (the program), a temporary
federal program in the department of the treasury that provided for a system of
shared public and private compensation for insured losses resulting from acts
of terrorism or war committed by or on behalf of a foreign interest. the program
was scheduled to terminate on december31, 2005. in december2005,
the terrorism risk insurance extension act of 2005 (the terrorism extension
act) was enacted into federal law, reauthorizing the program through december31,
2007, while reducing the federal role under the program.
in order for a loss to be covered under the program
(subject losses), the loss must meet certain aggregate industry loss minimums
that vary by program year of amounts $100 million or less, and must be the
result of an event that is certified as an act of terrorism by the u.s.
secretary of the treasury. the original program excluded from participation
certain of the following types of insurance: federal crop insurance, private
mortgage insurance, financial guaranty insurance, medical malpractice
insurance, health or life insurance, flood insurance and reinsurance. the
terrorism extension act exempted from coverage certain additional types of
insurance, including commercial automobile, professional liability (other than
directors and officers), surety, burglary and theft, and farm-owners
multi-peril. in the case of a war declared by congress, only workers
compensation losses are covered by the terrorism act and the terrorism
extension act. both acts generally require that all commercial property
casualty insurers licensed in the united states participate in the program.
under the program, a participating insurer is entitled to be reimbursed by the
federal government for a percentage of subject losses, after an insurer deductible,
subject to an annual cap. the federal reimbursement percentage is 85% in 2007.
the deductible is
calculated by applying the deductible percentage to the insurers direct earned
premiums for covered lines from the calendar year immediately preceding the applicable
year. the deductible under the program was 10% for 2004, 15% for 2005, 17.5%
for 2006 and will be 20% for 2007. the companys estimated deductible under the
program is $2.20 billion for 2007. the annual cap limits the amount of
aggregate subject losses for all participating insurers to $100 billion. once
subject losses have reached the $100 billion aggregate during a program year, congress
shall determine the source of funds, if any, available for losses that exceed
the $100 billion cap. the company had no terrorism-related losses in 2006, 2005
or 2004. if the program is not renewed for periods after january1, 2008,
the benefits of the program will not be available to the company, and the
company will be subject to losses from acts of terrorism subject only to the
terms and provisions of applicable policies, including policies written in 2007
for which the period of coverage extends into 2008. given the unpredictable
frequency and severity of terrorism losses, as well as the limited terrorism
coverage in the companys own reinsurance program, future losses from acts of
terrorism, particularly those involving nuclear, biological, chemical or
radiological events, could be material to the companys operating results,
financial condition and/or liquidity in future periods, particularly if the
program is not extended. regardless of whether the terrorism act is extended,
the company will continue to manage this type of catastrophic risk by
monitoring and controlling terrorism risk aggregations to the best of its
ability.
claim and claim
adjustment expense reserves
claim and claim adjustment expense reserves (loss
reserves) represent managements estimate of ultimate unpaid costs of losses
and loss adjustment expenses for claims that have been reported and claims that
have been incurred but not yet reported.
management continually refines its reserve estimates
in a regular ongoing process that includes review of key assumptions,
underlying variables and historical loss experience. the company reflects
adjustments to reserves in the results of operations in the periods in which
the estimates are changed. in establishing reserves, the company takes into
account estimated recoveries for reinsurance, salvage and subrogation.
the reserves are also
reviewed regularly by qualified actuaries employed by the company. for additional information on the
process of estimating reserves and a discussion of underlying variables and
risk factors, see item 7managements discussion and analysis of financial
condition and results of operationscritical accounting estimates.
the process of estimating loss reserves involves a
high degree of judgment and requires the consideration of a number of
variables. these variables (discussed by product line in the critical
accounting estimates section) are affected by both internal and external
events, such as changes in claims handling procedures, inflation, judicial
trends and legislative changes, among others. the impact of many of these items
on ultimate costs of claims and claim adjustment expenses is difficult to
estimate. reserve estimation difficulties also differ significantly by product
line due to differences in the underlying insurance contract (e.g., claims made
versus occurrence), claim complexity, the volume of claims, the potential
severity of individual claims, determining the occurrence date for a claim, and
reporting lags (the time between the occurrence of the insured event and when
it is actually reported to the insurer). informed judgment is applied
throughout the process.
the company derives
estimates for unreported claims and development on reported claims principally
from actuarial analyses of historical patterns of loss development by accident
year for each type of exposure and business unit. similarly, the company
derives estimates of unpaid loss adjustment expenses principally from actuarial
analyses of historical development patterns of the relationship of loss
adjustment expenses to losses for each line of business and type of exposure.
for a description of the companys reserving methods for asbestos and
environmental claims, see item 7managements discussion and analysis of
financial condition and results of operationsasbestos claims and litigation,
and environmental claims and litigation.
discounting
included in the claims and
claim adjustment expense reserves in the consolidated balance sheet are certain
reserves discounted to the present value of estimated future payments. the
liabilities for losses for some long-term disability payments under workers
compensation insurance and workers compensation excess insurance, which
totaled $1.98 billion and $1.92 billion at december31, 2006 and 2005,
respectively, were discounted using a rate of 5% at december31, 2006 and
2005. reserves related to certain fixed and determinable asbestos-related
settlements, where all payment amounts and their timing are known, totaled $34
million at december31, 2005, and were discounted using a rate of 2.6% at
that date. there were no such reserves at december31, 2006. reserves for
certain assumed reinsurance business were discounted using a rate of 7% and a
range of rates from 5% to 7.5%, at december31, 2006 and 2005,
respectively, and totaled $37 million and $79 million at december31, 2006
and 2005, respectively.
claims and claim
adjustment expense development table
the table on page26 sets forth the year-end
reserves from 1996 through 2006 and the subsequent changes in those reserves,
presented on a historical basis. the original estimates, cumulative amounts
paid and reestimated reserves in the table for the years 1996 through 2003 have
not been restated to reflect the acquisition of spc in 2004. the table includes
spc reserves beginning at december31, 2004.
the original estimates, cumulative amounts paid and
reestimated reserves in the table for the years 1996 to 2000 have
also not been restated to reflect the acquisition of northland and commercial
guaranty casualty. beginning in 2001, the table includes the reserve activity
of northland and commercial guaranty casualty. the data in the table is
presented in accordance with reporting requirements of the securities and
exchange commission (sec). care must be taken to avoid misinterpretation by
those unfamiliar with this information or familiar with other data commonly
reported by the insurance industry. the accompanying data is not accident year
data, but rather a display of 1996 to 2006 year-end reserves and the subsequent
changes in those reserves.
for instance, the cumulative deficiency (redundancy)
shown in the accompanying table for each year represents the aggregate amount
by which original estimates of reserves as of that year-end have changed in
subsequent years. accordingly, the cumulative deficiency for a year relates
only to reserves at that year-end and those amounts are not additive. expressed
another way, if the original reserves at the end of 1996 included $4 million
for a loss that is finally paid in 2005 for $5 million, the $1 million
deficiency (the excess of the actual payment of $5 million over the original
estimate of $4 million) would be included in the cumulative deficiencies in each
of the years 1996 to 2004 shown in the accompanying table.
various factors may distort the re-estimated reserves
and cumulative deficiency or redundancy shown in the accompanying table. for
example, a substantial portion of the cumulative deficiencies shown in the
accompanying table arise from claims on policies written prior to the mid-1970s
involving liability exposures such as asbestos and environmental claims. in the
post-1984 period, the company has developed more stringent underwriting
standards and policy exclusions and has significantly contracted or terminated
the writing of these risks. see item 7managements discussion and analysis of
financial condition and results of operationsasbestos claims and litigation,
and environmental claims and litigation.
general conditions and trends that have affected the development of
these liabilities in the past will not necessarily recur in the future.
other factors that affect the data in the accompanying
table include the discounting of certain reserves, as discussed above, and the
use of retrospectively rated insurance policies. for example, workers
compensation indemnity reserves (tabular reserves) are discounted to reflect
the time value of money. apparent deficiencies will continue to occur as the
discount on these workers compensation reserves is accreted at the appropriate
interest rates. also, a portion of national accounts business is underwritten
with retrospectively rated insurance policies in which the ultimate loss
experience is primarily borne by the insured. for this business, increases in
loss experience result in an increase in reserves and an offsetting increase in
amounts recoverable from insureds. likewise, decreases in loss experience
result in a decrease in reserves and an offsetting decrease in amounts
recoverable from these insureds. the amounts recoverable on these
retrospectively rated policies mitigate the impact of the cumulative
deficiencies or redundancies on the companys earnings but are not reflected in
the accompanying table.
because
of these and other factors, it is difficult to develop a meaningful
extrapolation of estimated future redundancies or deficiencies in loss reserves
from the data in the accompanying table.
(atdecember31,inmillions)
2001(a)
2002(a)
2003(a)
2004(a)(b)
2005(a)(b)
2006(a)(b)
reservesforclaims and
claimadjustment expenseoriginally estimated
$
21,816
$
21,406
$
20,763
$
19,983
$
19,435
$
20,197
$
23,268
$
24,055
$
41,446
$
42,895
$
42,844
cumulative amounts paid
asof
one year later
3,704
4,025
4,159
4,082
4,374
5,018
5,170
4,651
8,871
8,632
two years later
6,600
6,882
6,879
6,957
7,517
8,745
8,319
8,686
14,666
three years later
8,841
8,850
9,006
9,324
10,218
11,149
11,312
11,541
four years later
10,355
10,480
10,809
11,493
12,000
13,402
13,548
five years later
11,649
11,915
12,565
12,911
13,603
15,115
six years later
12,893
13,376
13,647
14,172
14,958
seven years later
14,154
14,306
14,697
15,301
eight years later
14,987
15,225
15,681
nine years later
15,844
16,061
ten years later
16,223
reserves reestimated
as of
one year later
21,345
21,083
20,521
19,736
19,394
23,228
23,658
24,222
41,706
42,466
two years later
21,160
20,697
20,172
19,600
22,233
24,083
24,592
25,272
42,565
three years later
20,816
20,417
19,975
22,302
22,778
25,062
25,553
26,042
four years later
20,664
20,168
22,489
22,612
23,871
25,953
26,288
five years later
20,427
22,570
22,593
23,591
24,872
26,670
six years later
22,851
22,625
23,492
24,559
25,521
seven years later
22,861
23,530
24,446
25,114
eight years later
23,759
24,425
24,908
nine years later
24,601
24,832
ten years later
24,783
cumulative deficiency (redundancy)(a)(b)
2,967
3,426
4,145
5,131
6,086
6,473
3,020
1,987
1,119
(429
)
gross liabilityend
of year
$
30,969
$
30,138
$
29,411
$
28,854
$
28,312
$
30,617
$
33,628
$
34,474
$
58,984
$
61,007
$
59,202
reinsurance recoverables
9,153
8,732
8,648
8,871
8,877
10,420
10,360
10,419
17,538
18,112
16,358
net liabilityend of year
$
21,816
$
21,406
$
20,763
$
19,983
$
19,435
$
20,197
$
23,268
$
24,055
$
41,446
$
42,895
$
42,844
gross reestimated liability-latest
$
33,970
$
33,724
$
34,115
$
35,055
$
36,211
$
38,950
$
37,927
$
37,003
$
60,376
$
61,041
reestimated reinsurance recoverables-latest
9,187
8,892
9,207
9,941
10,690
12,280
11,639
10,961
17,811
18,575
net reestimated liability-latest
$
24,783
$
24,832
$
24,908
$
25,114
$
25,521
$
26,670
$
26,288
$
26,042
$
42,565
$
42,466
gross cumulative
deficiency
$
3,001
$
3,586
$
4,704
$
6,201
$
7,899
$
8,333
$
4,299
$
2,529
$
1,392
$
included
in the cumulative deficiency by year is the following impact of unfavorable
prior year reserve development related to asbestos and environmental claims and
claim adjustment expenses, in millions:
asbestos
gross
$
6,150
$
6,063
$
5,928
$
5,800
$
5,613
$
5,330
$
1,670
$
1,645
$
1,031
$
net
$
4,474
$
4,405
$
4,339
$
4,282
$
4,232
$
4,043
$
1,098
$
1,074
$
$
environmental
gross
$
1,093
$
1,014
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
net
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
(a) includes reserves of the northland company and its
subsidiaries and commercial guaranty lloyds insurance company which were
acquired from citigroup on october1, 2001. also includes reserves of
commercial guaranty casualty insurance company, which was contributed to tpc by
citigroup on october3, 2001. at december31, 2001, these gross
reserves were $867 million, and net reserves were $633 million.
(b) for years prior to 2004, excludes spc
reserves, which were acquired on april1, 2004. accordingly, the reserve
development (net reserves for claims and claim adjustment expenses reestimated
as of subsequent years less net reserves recorded at the end of the year, as
originally estimated) for years prior to 2004 relates only to losses recorded
by tpc and does not include reserve development recorded by spc. for 2004 and
subsequent years, includes spc reserves and subsequent development recorded by
spc. at december31, 2004, spc gross reserves were $23,274 million and net
reserves were $15,959 million.
reserves on
statutory accounting basis
at december31, 2006,
2005 and 2004, claim and claim adjustment expense reserves (net of reinsurance)
shown in the preceding table, which are prepared in accordance u.s. generally
accepted accounting principles (gaap), were $104 million, $296 million and $282
million lower, respectively, than those reported in the companys respective
annual reports filed with insurance regulators, which are prepared in
accordance with statutory accounting practices. the accounting for retroactive
reinsurance is a significant factor in the difference in reserves. retroactive
reinsurance balances result from reinsurance placed to cover losses on insured
events occurring prior to the contract inception. for gaap reporting,
retroactive reinsurance balances are included in reinsurance recoverables and
result in lower net reserve amounts. statutory accounting practices require
retroactive reinsurance balances to be recorded in other liabilities as
contra-liabilities rather than in loss reserves.
asbestos and
environmental claims
asbestos and environmental
claims are segregated from other claims and are handled separately by the
companys special liability group, a separate unit staffed by dedicated legal,
claim, finance and engineering professionals. for additional information on
asbestos and environmental claims, see item 7managements discussion and
analysis of financial conditions and results of operations.
intercompany
reinsurance pooling arrangements
most of the companys
insurance subsidiaries are members of intercompany property and casualty reinsurance
pooling arrangements. pooling arrangements permit the participating companies
to rely on the capacity of the entire pools capital and surplus rather than
just on its own capital and surplus. under such arrangements, the members share
substantially all insurance business that is written, and allocate the combined
premiums, losses and expenses. during 2005, the company combined the previously
separate st. paul insurance group and travelers property casualty pools,
forming the new st. paul travelers reinsurance pool. travelers indemnity
company is the lead company of the new pool, which includes 28 companies. the
company also merged gulf insurance company, the lead company of the former gulf
insurance group, into travelers indemnity company effective july1, 2005.
as of december31, 2006, there were two intercompany pooling arrangements:
the st. paul travelers reinsurance pool and the northland pool.
ratings
ratings are an important factor in setting the companys
competitive position in the insurance marketplace. the company receives ratings
from the following major rating agencies:a.m. best company (a.m. best),
fitch ratings (fitch), moodys investors service (moodys) and standard&
poors corp. (s&p). rating agencies typically issue two types of ratings:
claims-paying (or financial strength) ratings which assess an insurers ability
to meet its financial obligations to policyholders and debt ratings which
assess a companys prospects for repaying its debts and assist lenders in
setting interest rates and terms for a companys short and long term borrowing
needs. agency ratings are not a recommendation to buy, sell or hold any
security, and they may be revised or withdrawn at any time by the rating
organization. each agencys rating should be evaluated independently of any
other agencys rating. the system and the number of rating categories can vary
widely from rating agency to rating agency. customers usually focus on
claims-paying ratings, while creditors focus on debt ratings. investors use
both to evaluate a companys overall financial strength. the ratings issued on
the company or its subsidiaries by any of these agencies are announced publicly
and are available on the companys website and from the agencies.
the companys insurance
operations could be negatively impacted by a downgrade in one or more of the
companys financial strength ratings. if this were to occur, there could be a
reduced demand for certain products in certain markets. additionally, the
companys ability to access the capital markets could be impacted and higher
borrowing costs may be incurred.
claimspaying ratings
the
following table summarizes the current claims-paying (or financial strength)
ratings of the st. paul travelers reinsurance pool, travelers c&s of
america, northland pool, travelers personal single state companies, travelers
europe, discover reinsurance company, afianzadora insurgentes, s.a. de c.v., st.
paul guarantee insurance company and st. paul travelers insurance company
limited bya.m. best, moodys, s&p and fitch as of february23,
2007. the table also presents the position of each rating in the applicable
agencys rating scale.
a.m.best
moodys
s&p
fitch
st. paul
travelers reinsurance pool(a)(b)
a+(2ndof16)
aa3(4thof21)
aa-(4thof21)
aa-(4thof24)
travelers c&s
of america
a+
(2nd of 16)
aa3 (4th of 21)
aa- (4th of 21)
aa- (4th of 24)
northland pool(c)
a
(3rd of 16)
first floridian
auto and home ins.co.
a-
(4th of 16)
aa- (4th of 24)
first trenton
indemnity company
a
(3rd of 16)
aa- (4th of 24)
the premier
insurance co. of ma
a
(3rd of 16)
travelers europe
a+
(2nd of 16)
aa3 (4th of 21)
aa- (4th of 21)
discover
reinsurance company
a-
(4th of 16)
afianzadora
insurgentes, s.a.dec.v.(d)
a-
(4th of 16)
st. paul
guarantee insurance company
a
(3rd of 16)
st. paul travelers
insurance company limited
a (3rd of 16)
(a) the st. paul travelers
reinsurance pool consists of:the travelers indemnity company, the
charter oak fire insurance company, the phoenix insurance company, the
travelers indemnity company of connecticut, the travelers indemnity company of
america, travelers property casualty company of america, travelers commercial
casualty company, travco insurance company, the travelers
home and marine insurance
company, travelers casualty and surety company, the standard fire insurance
company, the automobile insurance company of hartford, connecticut, travelers
casualty insurance company of america, farmington casualty company, travelers
commercial insurance company, travelers casualty company of connecticut,
travelers property casualty insurance company, travelers personal security
insurance company, travelers personal insurance company, travelers excess and
surplus lines company, st. paul fire and marine insurance company, st. paul
surplus lines insurance company, athena assurance company, st. paul protective
insurance company, st. paul medical liability insurance company, discover
property& casualty insurance company, discover specialty insurance
company, and united states fidelity and guaranty company.
(b) the following affiliated
companies are 100% reinsured by one of the pool participants noted in (a)above:
atlantic insurance company, fidelity and guaranty insurance company, fidelity
and guaranty insurance underwriters,inc., gulf underwriters insurance
company, seaboard surety company, select insurance company, st. paul fire and
casualty insurance company, st. paul guardian insurance company, st. paul
mercury insurance company, the travelers lloyds insurance company and travelers
lloyds of texas insurance company.
(c) the northland pool
consists of: northland insurance company, northfield insurance company,
northland casualty company, mendota insurance company, mendakota insurance
company, american equity insurance company and american equity specialty
insurance company. in january2007, the company reached a definitive
agreement to sell mendota insurance company and its wholly-owned subsidiary,
mendakota insurance company.
(d) in
december2006, the company reached a definitive agreement to sell its
mexican subsidiary, afianzadora insurgentes, s.a. de c.v.
debt ratings
the
following table summarizes the current debt, preferred stock and commercial
paper ratings of the company and its subsidiaries bya.m. best, moodys,
s&p and fitch as of february23, 2007. the table also presents the
position of each rating in the applicable agencys rating scale.
a.m.best
moodys
s&p
fitch
senior debt
a-
(7thof22)
a3(7thof21)
a-(7thof22)
a-(7thof22)
subordinated debt
bbb+
(8th of 22)
baa
(8th of 21)
bbb
(9th of 22)
a-
(7th of 22)
junior
subordinated debt
bbb+
(8th of 22)
baa
(8th of 21)
bbb-
(10th of 22)
bbb+
(8th of 22)
trust preferred
securities
bbb
(9th of 22)
baa
(8th of 21)
bbb-
(10th of 22)
bbb+
(8th of 22)
preferred stock
bbb
(9th of 22)
baa2
(9th of 21)
bbb-
(10th of 22)
bbb+
(8th of 22)
commercial paper.
amb-1 (2nd of 6)
prime-2 (2nd of 4)
a-2 (3rd of 8)
f-2 (3rd of 8)
rating agency actions
the following
rating agency actions were taken with respect to the company in 2006 and
through february23, 2007:
on
february2, 2006, fitch affirmed all ratings of the company, including the
a- long-term issuer rating, a- ratings on the companys senior unsecured
notes, and bbb+ ratings on the companys subordinated notes in capital
securities. additionally, fitch affirmed the aa- insurer financial strength
(ifs) ratings on members of the st. paul travelers reinsurance pool. the rating
outlooks are stable.
on
may3, 2006, moodys affirmed the long-term debt ratings (senior unsecured
debt at a3) of the company and the ifs ratings on members of the st. paul
travelers reinsurance pool (aa3). the outlook for these ratings was changed to
stable from negative.
on
may30, 2006,a.m. best affirmed the financial strength rating (fsr)
of a+ (superior) and issuer credit ratings (icr) of aa- of st. paul
travelers insurance companies and its property/casualty members. concurrently,a.m.
best affirmed the debt ratings of a- on senior debt, bbb+ on subordinated
debt, bbb on trust preferred securities, bbb on preferred stock and amb-1
on commercial paper of the st. paul travelers companies,inc. additionally,a.m.
best downgraded the fsr to a- (excellent) from a (excellent) and assigned
an icr of a- to first floridian auto and home insurance company.
on
june14, 2006, s&p raised its fsr ratings on the st. paul travelers
reinsurance pool to aa- from a+ and raised its counterparty credit rating
on the st. paul travelers companies,inc. to a- from bbb+. the ratings
outlooks are stable.
on
june15, 2006, s&p assigned its a- senior debt rating to the $800
million senior unsecured notes due in 2016 and 2036 issued by the company in june2006.
on
june15, 2006,a.m. best assigned a debt rating of a- to the $800 million
senior unsecured notes due in 2016 and 2036 issued by the company in june2006.
on
june15, 2006, fitch announced that it expected to assign an a- debt
rating to the $800 million senior unsecured notes due in 2016 and 2036 planned
to be issued by the company in june2006. subsequently, on june19,
2006, fitch assigned the a- debt rating to these senior notes.
on
june16, 2006, moodys assigned an a3 debt rating to the $800 million
senior unsecured notes due in 2016 and 2036 issued by the company in june2006,
and affirmed the stable outlook it had announced on may3, 2006.
on
july28, 2006, fitch affirmed all ratings of the st. paul travelers
companies,inc., including the issuer default rating of a, the a-
ratings on senior unsecured notes and the bbb+ ratings on subordinated notes
and capital securities. in addition, the aa- insurer financial strength
ratings on members of the st. paul travelers inter-company pool was affirmed. the
ratings outlooks are stable.
on
december18, 2006,a.m. best reaffirmed the fsr of a- (excellent)
of afianzadora insurgentes, s.a. de c.v., the companys mexican subsidiary.
on
january18, 2007,a.m. best placed the fsr of a- (excellent) of
afianzadora insurgentes, s.a. de c.v., the companys mexican subsidiary, under
review with negative implications. this rating action was a result of the
company having reached a definitive agreement to sell this surety company. the
rating will remain under review until the sale is finalized.
on january24, 2007,a.m.
best placed the fsr of a (excellent) and the icr of a of mendota insurance
company and its wholly-owned subsidiary, mendakota insurance company, under
review with negative implications. these ratings actions were the result of the
company having reached a definitive agreement to sell these subsidiaries. the
ratings will remain under review pending regulatory approval and completion of
the transaction. the ratings of the northland pool were unchanged.
investment operations
a significant majority of
funds available for investment are deployed in a widely diversified portfolio
of high quality, liquid intermediate-term taxable u.s. government, corporate
and mortgage backed bonds
and
tax-exempt u.s. municipal bonds. the company closely monitors the duration of
its fixed maturity investments, and investment purchases and sales are executed
with the objective of having adequate funds available to satisfy the companys
insurance and debt obligations. the companys management of the duration of the
fixed income investment portfolio generally produces a duration that modestly exceeds
the duration of the companys net insurance liabilities.
the primary goals of the
companys asset liability management process are to satisfy the insurance
liabilities, manage the interest rate risk embedded in those insurance
liabilities, and maintain sufficient liquidity to cover fluctuations in
projected liability cash flows. generally, the expected principal and interest
payments produced by the companys fixed income portfolio adequately fund the
estimated runoff of the companys insurance reserves. although this is not an
exact cash flow match in each period, the substantial degree by which the
market value of the fixed income portfolio exceeds the present value of the net
insurance liabilities, plus the positive cash flow from newly sold policies and
the large amount of high quality liquid bonds provides assurance of the companys
ability to fund the payment of claims without having to sell illiquid assets or
access credit facilities.
the company also invests
much smaller amounts in equity securities, venture capital and real estate.
these investment classes have the potential for higher returns but also involve
varying degrees of risk, including less stable rates of return and less
liquidity.
see note 3 of notes to the
companys consolidated financial statements for additional information
regarding the companys investment portfolio.
derivatives
see notes 1 and 14 of
notes to the companys consolidated financial statements for a discussion of
the policies and transactions related to the companys derivative financial
instruments.
regulation
state and federal regulation
stas insurance
subsidiaries are subject to regulation in the various states and jurisdictions
in which they transact business. the extent of regulation varies, but generally
derives from statutes that delegate regulatory, supervisory and administrative
authority to a department of insurance in each state. the regulation,
supervision and administration relate, among other things, to standards of
solvency that must be met and maintained, the licensing of insurers and their
agents, the nature of and limitations on investments, premium rates,
restrictions on the size of risks that may be insured under a single policy,
reserves and provisions for unearned premiums, losses and other obligations,
deposits of securities for the benefit of policyholders, approval of policy
forms and the regulation of market conduct, including the use of credit
information in underwriting as well as other underwriting and claims practices.
in addition, many states have enacted variations of competitive ratemaking
laws, which allow insurers to set certain premium rates for certain classes of
insurance without having to obtain the prior approval of the state insurance
department. state insurance departments also conduct periodic examinations of
the financial condition and market conduct of insurance companies and require
the filing of financial and other reports on a quarterly and annual basis. stas
insurance subsidiaries are collectively licensed to transact insurance business
in all states, the district of columbia, guam, puerto rico, bermuda and the
u.s. virgin islands.
agent and broker compensation
as part of ongoing,
industry-wide investigations, the company has received subpoenas and written
requests for information from government agencies and authorities, including 21
states and the sec. the areas of inquiry addressed to the company include the
method by which brokers and agents are compensated. the company is cooperating
with these subpoenas and requests for information. as
described in more
detail in parti, item 3legal proceedings herein, in august2006,
the company entered into agreements with several of these states to resolve
issues related to broker and agent compensation. the company discontinued paying contingent commissions
on excess casualty and umbrella business effective september30, 2006. in
addition, the company discontinued paying contingent commissions for homeowners
multi-peril, private passenger automobile physical damage, private passenger
automobile no-fault, other private passenger automobile liability, boiler and
machinery and financial guaranty insurance lines effective january1, 2007.
the company has developed alternative compensation arrangements for these lines
of business that compensate brokers and agents in a manner that differentiates
for business performance and is consistent with all applicable laws. beginning
january1, 2007, the company is offering an optional fixed commission program
for most commercial insurance lines.
insurance regulation concerning
dividends
stas principal insurance subsidiaries are domiciled
in the states of connecticut and minnesota. the insurance holding company laws
of both states applicable to stas subsidiaries require notice to, and approval
by, the state insurance commissioner for the declaration or payment of any
dividend, that together with other distributions made within the preceding
twelve months, exceeds the greater of 10% of the insurers capital and surplus
as of the preceding december31, or the insurers net income for the
twelve-month period ending the preceding december31, in each case
determined in accordance with statutory accounting practices and by state
regulation. this declaration or payment is further limited by adjusted
unassigned surplus, as determined in accordance with statutory accounting
practices.
the insurance holding
company laws of other states in which stas insurance subsidiaries are
domiciled generally contain similar, although in some instances somewhat more
restrictive, limitations on the payment of dividends.
premium rate approvals
stas insurance
subsidiaries are subject to each states regulations regarding premium rate
approvals. the applicable regulations are used by states to establish standards
to ensure that rates are not excessive, inadequate, unfairly discriminatory, or
used to engage in unfair price competition. an insurers ability to increase
premiums and the relative timing of the process, are dependent upon each
respective states requirements.
requirements for exiting geographic
markets and/or canceling or nonrenewing policies
several states have
regulations which may impact the timing and/or the ability of an insurer to
either discontinue or substantially reduce its writings in that state. these
regulations typically require prior notice, and in some instances insurance
department approval, prior to discontinuing a line of business or withdrawing
from that state.
insurance holding company statutes
as a holding company, sta
is not regulated as an insurance company. however, since sta owns capital stock
in insurance subsidiaries, it is subject to state insurance holding company
statutes, as well as certain other laws, of each of its insurance subsidiaries
states of domicile. all holding company statutes, as well as other laws,
require disclosure and, in some instances, prior approval of material
transactions between an insurance company and an affiliate. the holding company
statutes and other laws also require, among other things, prior approval of an
acquisition of control of a domestic insurer, some transactions between
affiliates and the payment of extraordinary dividends or distributions.
insurance regulations concerning
change of control
many state insurance regulatory laws contain
provisions that require advance approval by state agencies of any change in
control of an insurance company that is domiciled, or, in some cases, having
substantial business that it is deemed to be commercially domiciled, in that
state.
the laws of many states also contain provisions
requiring pre-notification to state agencies prior to any change in control of
a non-domestic insurance company admitted to transact business in that state.
while these pre-notification statutes do not authorize the state agency to
disapprove the change of control, they do authorize issuance of cease and
desist orders with respect to the non-domestic insurer if it is determined that
some conditions, such as undue market concentration, would result from the
acquisition.
any transactions that would constitute a change in
control of any of stas insurance subsidiaries would generally require prior
approval by the insurance departments of the states in which the insurance
subsidiaries are domiciled or commercially domiciled. they may also require
preacquisition notification in those states that have adopted preacquisition
notification provisions and in which such insurance subsidiaries are admitted
to transact business.
one of stas insurance subsidiaries and its operations
at lloyds are domiciled in the united kingdom. insurers in the united kingdom
are subject to change of control restrictions in the financial services and
markets act of 2000 including approval of the financial services authority. insurers
in the republic of ireland are subject to regulation by the irish financial
services regulatory authority.
some of stas other insurance subsidiaries are
domiciled in, or authorized to conduct insurance business in, canada.
authorized insurers in canada are subject to change of control restrictions in section407
of the insurance companies act, including approval of the office of the
superintendent of financial institutions.
these requirements may
deter, delay or prevent transactions affecting the control of or the ownership
of common stock, including transactions that could be advantageous to stas
shareholders.
assessments for
guaranty funds and second-injury funds and other mandatory pooling arrangements
virtually all states require insurers licensed to do
business in their state to bear a portion of the loss suffered by some insureds
because of the insolvency of other insurers. many states also have laws that
established second-injury funds to provide compensation to injured employees
for aggravation of a prior condition or injury.
stas insurance
subsidiaries are also required to participate in various involuntary assigned
risk pools, principally involving workers compensation and automobile
insurance, which provide various insurance coverages to individuals or other
entities that otherwise are unable to purchase that coverage in the voluntary
market.
insurance
regulatory information system
the national association of insurance commissioners
(naic) developed the insurance regulatory information system (iris) to help
state regulators identify companies that may require special attention. financial
examiners review annual statements and key financial ratios based on year-end
data. these ratios assist state insurance departments in executing their statutory
mandate to oversee the financial condition of insurance companies. each ratio
has an established usual range of results. a ratio result falling outside the
usual range of iris ratios, however, is not considered a failing result;
rather, unusual values are viewed as part of the regulatory early monitoring
system. furthermore, in some years, it may not be unusual for financially sound
companies to have several ratios with results outside the usual ranges.
generally, an insurance
company will become subject to regulatory scrutiny if it falls outside the
usual ranges of four or more of the ratios.
based on preliminary 2006 iris ratios calculated by
the company, discover reinsurance company had results outside the normal range
for two of the iris ratios, due to reserve strengthening actions taken in 2005.
in 2005, most of the companys insurance subsidiaries in the st. paul travelers
reinsurance pool had results outside the normal range for one of the iris
ratios, due to reserve strengthening actions that occurred in 2004 and the
combining of the two pools that occurred in 2005. in addition, discover
reinsurance company had results outside the normal range for three of the iris
ratios, due to reserve strengthening actions in 2005 and 2004.
management does not
anticipate regulatory action as a result of the 2006 iris ratio results. in all
instances in prior years, regulators have been satisfied upon follow-up that no
regulatory action was required. it is possible that similar results could occur
in the future. no state insurance department has taken any regulatory action
with respect to the iris ratios of any of stas insurance subsidiaries for the
year ended december31, 2005.
risk-based capital
(rbc) requirements
the naic has an rbc requirement for most property and
casualty insurance companies. the rbc requirement determines minimum capital
requirements and is intended to raise the level of protection for policyholder
obligations. under laws adopted by individual states, insurers having total
adjusted capital less than that required by the rbc calculation will be subject
to varying degrees of regulatory action, depending on the level of capital
inadequacy.
the formulas have not been
designed to differentiate among adequately capitalized companies that operate
with higher levels of capital. therefore, it is inappropriate and ineffective
to use the formulas to rate or to rank these companies. at december31,
2006, all of stas insurance subsidiaries had total adjusted capital in excess
of the rbc requirement.
investment
regulation
insurance company
investments must comply with applicable laws and regulations which prescribe
the kind, quality and concentration of investments. in general, these laws and
regulations permit investments in federal, state and municipal obligations,
corporate bonds, preferred and common equity securities, mortgage loans, real
estate and certain other investments, subject to specified limits and certain
other qualifications.
international
regulation
stas insurance underwriting
subsidiary based in the united kingdom, st. paul travelers insurance company
limited, is regulated by the financial services authority (fsa). the fsas
principal objectives are to maintain market confidence, promote public
understanding of the financial system, protect consumers, and to fight
financial crime. stas lloyds syndicates are also regulated by the fsa, which
has delegated certain regulatory responsibilities to the council of lloyds.
through lloyds, sta is licensed to write business in over 70 countries
throughout the world by virtue of lloyds international licenses. in each such
country sta is subject to the laws and insurance regulation of that country. in
canada, the conduct of stas insurance business is regulated under provisions
of the insurance companies act, which requires insurance companies to maintain
certain levels of capital depending on the type and amount of insurance
policies in force. in australia, stas branch in runoff is regulated by the
australian prudential regulation authority.
other information
customer
concentration
in the opinion of the
companys management, no material part of the business of the company and its
subsidiaries is dependent upon a single customer or group of customers, the
loss of any one of which would have a materially adverse effect on the company,
and no one customer or group of affiliated customers accounts for as much as
10% of the companys consolidated revenues.
employees
at december31, 2006,
the company had approximately 32,800 employees. the company believes that its
employee relations are satisfactory. none of the companys employees are
subject to collective bargaining agreements.
sources of
liquidity
for a discussion of the
companys sources of funds and maturities of the long-term debt of the company,
see item 7, managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and
results of operationsliquidity and capital resources, and note 7 of notes to
the companys consolidated financial statements.
taxation
for a discussion of tax
matters affecting the company and its operations, see note 10 of notes to the
companys consolidated financial statements.
financial
information about reportable business segments
for financial information
regarding reportable business segments of the company, see item 7managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations, and
note 2 of notes to the companys consolidated financial statements.
recent transactions
for information regarding recent transactions of the
company, see item 7, managements discussion and analysis of financial
condition and results of operations.
on february13, 2007,
sta announced that it had signed a definitive agreement with citigroup,inc.
to reacquire the red umbrella trademark, a familiar symbol that had represented
travelers and insurance protection for many years. sta expects to allocate the
purchase price principally to the umbrella trademark, which will be owned by
the company. after the closing of the transaction, sta intends to change its
name to the travelers companies,inc. and will begin trading on the new
york stock exchange under the new stock symbol trv. the transaction is
expected to be completed during the first quarter of 2007.
company website and
availability of sec filings
the companys internet
website is www.stpaultravelers.com.
information on the companys website is not a part of this form10-k.
the company makes available free of charge on its website or provides a link on
its website to the companys annual report on form10-k, quarterly
reports on form10-q and current reports on form8-k, and
any amendments to those reports filed or furnished pursuant to section13(a)or
15(d)of the securities exchange act of 1934, as soon as reasonably
practicable after those reports are electronically filed with, or furnished to,
the sec. to access these filings, go to the companys website, then click on sec
filings under the investors heading.
glossary
of selected insurance terms
accident year
the annual calendar
accounting period in which loss events occurred, regardless of when the
losses are actually reported, booked or paid.
adjusted unassigned
surplus
unassigned
surplus as of the most recent statutory annual report reduced by twenty-five
percent of that years unrealized appreciation in value or revaluation of
assets or unrealized profits on investments, as defined in that report.
admitted insurer
a company licensed
to transact insurance business within a state.
annuity
a contract that
pays a periodic benefit over the remaining life of a person (the annuitant),
the lives of two or more persons or for a specified period of time.
assigned risk pools
reinsurance pools
which cover risks for those unable to purchase insurance in the voluntary
market. possible reasons for this inability include the risk being too great
or the profit being too small under the required insurance rate structure.
the costs of the risks associated with these pools are charged back to
insurance carriers in proportion to their direct writings.
assumed reinsurance
insurance risks
acquired from a ceding company.
average value method
an actuarial method used
to estimate ultimate losses for a given cohort of claims such as an accident
year/product line component. if the paid-to-date losses are then subtracted
from the estimated ultimate losses, the result is an indication of the unpaid
losses.
the basic premise of the
method is that average claim values are stable and predictable over time for
a particular cohort of claims. the method is utilized most often where
ultimate claim counts are known or reliably estimable fairly early after the
start of an accident year and average values are expected to be fairly
predictable from one year to the next.
ultimate losses under
the method equal the known or estimated ultimate claim counts times the
estimated average value. estimated ultimate claim counts are frequently based
on a claim count development method, essentially the same as the paid and
case incurred development methods mentioned elsewhere in this glossary but
using claim count rather than claim dollar data. the average values can be
based on historical trends from past closed claims, or backed into from
estimated ultimate losses divided by estimated ultimate claim counts, or some
other approach. when the average values are calculated from ultimate loss
estimates, the resulting estimated averages may be supplemented with other
data/analyses.
bornheutter-ferguson method
an actuarial method to
estimate ultimate losses for a given cohort of claims such as an accident
year/product line component. if the paid-to-date losses are then subtracted
from the estimated ultimate losses, the result is an indication of the
outstanding losses.
the basic premise of the
method is that the historical ratio of additional claim activity to earned
premium for a given product line component/age-to-age period is stable and
predictable. it implicitly assumes that the actual activity to-date for past
periods for that cohort is not a credible predictor of future activity for
that cohort, or at least is not credible enough to override the a priori
assumption as to future activity. it may be applied to either paid or case
incurred claim data. it is used most often where the claim data is sparse
and/or volatile and for relatively young cohorts with low volumes and/or data
credibility.
to illustrate, the
method may assume that the ratio of additional paid losses from the 12 to 24
month period for an accident year is 10% of the original a priori expected
losses for that accident year. the original a priori expected losses are
typically based on the original loss ratio assumption for that accident year,
with subsequent adjustment as facts develop.
the ultimate losses
equal actual activity to-date plus the expected values for future periods.
broker
one who negotiates
contracts of insurance or reinsurance on behalf of an insured party,
receiving a commission from the insurer or reinsurer for placement and other
services rendered.
capacity
the percentage of
surplus, or the dollar amount of exposure, that an insurer or reinsurer is
willing or able to place at risk. capacity may apply to a single risk, a
program, a line of business or an entire book of business. capacity may be
constrained by legal restrictions, corporate restrictions or indirect
restrictions.
captive
a closely-held insurance
company whose primary purpose is to provide insurance coverage to the companys
owners or their affiliates.
case incurred loss development method
an actuarial method to estimate ultimate losses for a given cohort of claims
such as an accident year/product line component. if the paid-to-date losses
are then subtracted from the estimated ultimate losses, the result is an indication
of the unpaid losses.
the approach is the same
as that described in this glossary under the paid loss development method,
but based on the growth in cumulative case incurred losses (i.e., the sum of
claim-adjustor incurred estimates for claims in the cohort) rather than paid
losses. the basic premise of the method is that cumulative case incurred
losses for a given cohort of claims will grow in a stable, predictable
pattern from year-to-year, based on the age of the cohort.
case reserves
claim department
estimates of anticipated future payments to be made on each specific
individual reported claim.
casualty insurance
insurance which is
primarily concerned with the losses caused by injuries to third persons,
i.e., not the insured, and the legal liability imposed on the insured
resulting therefrom. it includes, but is not limited to, employers
liability, workers compensation, public liability, automobile liability,
personal liability and aviation liability insurance. it excludes certain
types of losses that by law or custom are considered as being exclusively
within the scope of other types of insurance, such as fire or marine.
catastrophe
a severe loss, resulting
from natural and manmade events, including risks such as fire, earthquake,
windstorm, explosion, terrorism and other similar events. each catastrophe
has unique characteristics. catastrophes are not predictable as to timing or
amount in advance, and therefore their effects are not included in earnings
or claims and claim adjustment expense reserves prior to occurrence. a
catastrophe may also result in the payment of reinstatement premiums and
assessments from various pools.
catastrophe loss
loss and directly
identified loss adjustment expenses from catastrophes.
catastrophe reinsurance
a form of excess of loss
reinsurance which, subject to a specified limit, indemnifies the ceding
company for the amount of loss in excess of a specified retention with
respect to an accumulation of losses resulting from a catastrophic event. the
actual reinsurance document is called a catastrophe cover. these
reinsurance contracts are typically designed to cover property insurance
losses but can be written to cover casualty insurance losses such as from
workers compensation policies.
cede; ceding company
when an insurer
reinsures its liability with another insurer or a cession, it cedes
business and is referred to as the ceding company.
ceded reinsurance
insurance risks
transferred to another company as reinsurance. see reinsurance.
claim
request by an insured
for indemnification by an insurance company for loss incurred from an insured
peril.
claim adjustment expenses
see loss adjustment
expenses (lae).
claims and claim adjustment expenses
see loss and loss adjustment expenses.
claims and claim adjustment expense reserves
see loss reserves.
cohort
a group of items or
individuals that share a particular statistical or demographic
characteristic. for example, all claims for a given product in a given market
for a given accident year would represent a cohort of claims
combined ratio
the sum of the loss and
lae ratio, the underwriting expense ratio and, where applicable, the ratio of
dividends to policyholders to net premiums earned. a combined ratio under
100% generally indicates an underwriting profit. a combined ratio over 100%
generally indicates an underwriting loss.
commercial multi-peril policies
refers to policies which
cover both property and third-party liability exposures.
commutation agreement
an agreement between a
reinsurer and a ceding company whereby the reinsurer pays an agreed upon
amount in exchange for a complete discharge of all obligations, including
future obligations, between the parties for reinsurance losses incurred.
deductible
the amount of loss that
an insured retains.
deferred acquisition costs
primarily commissions
and premium-related taxes that vary with and are primarily related to the
production of new contracts and are deferred and amortized to achieve a
matching of revenues and expenses when reported in financial statements
prepared in accordance with u.s. generally accepted accounting principles
(gaap).
deficiency
with regard to reserves
for a given liability, a deficiency exists when it is estimated or determined
that the reserves are insufficient to pay the ultimate settlement value of
the related liabilities. where the deficiency is the result of an estimate,
the estimated amount of deficiency (or even the finding of whether or not a
deficiency exists) may change as new information becomes available.
direct written premiums
the amounts charged by
an insurer to insureds in exchange for coverages provided in accordance with
the terms of an insurance contract. the amounts exclude the impact of all
reinsurance premiums, either assumed or ceded.
earned premiums or premiums earned
that portion of property casualty premiums written that applies to the
expired portion of the policy term. earned premiums are recognized as
revenues under both statutory accounting practices (sap) and gaap.
excess liability
additional casualty
coverage above a layer of insurance exposures.
excess of loss reinsurance
reinsurance that
indemnifies the reinsured against all or a specified portion of losses over a
specified dollar amount or retention.
expense ratio
see underwriting
expense ratio.
facultative reinsurance
the reinsurance of all
or a portion of the insurance provided by a single policy. each policy
reinsured is separately negotiated.
fidelity and surety programs
fidelity insurance
coverage protects an insured for loss due to embezzlement or misappropriation
of funds by an employee. surety is a three-party agreement in which the
insurer agrees to pay a second party or make complete an obligation in
response to the default, acts or omissions of an insured.
ground-up method
a method to estimate
ultimate claim costs for a given cohort of claims such as an accident
year/product line component. it involves analyzing the exposure at an
individual insured level and then through the use of deterministic or
stochastic scenarios and/or simulations, estimating the ultimate losses for
those insureds. the total losses for the cohort are then the sum of the
losses for each individual insured.
in practice, the method
is sometimes simplified by performing the individual insured analysis only
for the larger insureds, with the costs for the smaller insureds estimated
via sampling approaches (extrapolated to the rest of the smaller insured
population) or aggregate approaches (using assumptions consistent with the
ground-up larger insured analysis).
guaranteed cost products
an insurance policy
where the premiums charged will not be adjusted for actual loss experience
during the covered period.
guaranty fund
state-regulated
mechanism which is financed by assessing insurers doing business in those
states. should insolvencies occur, these funds are available to meet some or
all of the insolvent insurers obligations to policyholders.
incurred but not reported (ibnr) reserves
reserves for estimated losses and lae that have been incurred but not yet
reported to the insurer. this includes amounts for unreported claims,
development on known cases, and re-opened claims.
inland marine
a broad type of
insurance generally covering articles that may be transported from one place
to another, as well as bridges, tunnels and other instrumentalities of
transportation. it includes goods in transit, generally other than
transoceanic, and may include policies for movable objects such as personal
effects, personal property, jewelry, furs, fine art and others.
iris ratios
financial ratios
calculated by the naic to assist state insurance departments in monitoring
the financial condition of insurance companies.
large deductible policy
an insurance policy
where the customer assumes at least $25,000 or more of each loss. typically,
the insurer is responsible for paying the entire loss under those policies
and then seeks reimbursement from the insured for the deductible amount.
lloyds
an insurance marketplace
based in london, england, where brokers, representing clients with insurable
risks, deal with lloyds underwriters, who represent investors. the investors
are grouped together into syndicates that provide capital to insure the
risks.
loss
an occurrence that is
the basis for submission and/or payment of a claim. losses may be covered,
limited or excluded from coverage, depending on the terms of the policy.
loss adjustment
expenses (lae)
the expenses of settling claims, including legal and other fees and the
portion of general expenses allocated to claim settlement costs.
loss and lae ratio
for sap, it is the ratio
of incurred losses and loss adjustment expenses to net earned premiums. for
gaap, it is the ratio of incurred losses and loss adjustment expenses reduced
by an allocation of fee income to net earned premiums.
loss reserves
liabilities established
by insurers and reinsurers to reflect the estimated cost of claims incurred
that the insurer or reinsurer will ultimately be required to pay in respect
of insurance or reinsurance it has written. reserves are established for
losses and for lae, and consist of case reserves and ibnr reserves. as the
term is used in this document, loss reserves is meant to include reserves
for both losses and lae.
loss reserve development
the increase or decrease
in incurred claims and claim adjustment expenses as a result of the
re-estimation of claims and claim adjustment expense reserves at successive
valuation dates for a given group of claims. loss reserve development may be
related to prior year or current year development.
losses incurred
the total losses
sustained by an insurance company under a policy or policies, whether paid or
unpaid. incurred losses include a provision for ibnr.
national association of
insurance commissioners (naic)
an organization of the insurance commissioners or directors of all 50 states,
the district of columbia and the five u.s. territories organized to promote
consistency of regulatory practice and statutory accounting standards
throughout the united states.
net written premiums
direct written premiums
plus assumed reinsurance premiums less premiums ceded to reinsurers.
operating income (loss)
net income (loss)
excluding the after-tax impact of net realized investment gains (losses),
discontinued operations and cumulative effect of changes in accounting
principles when applicable.
operating income (loss)
per share
operating income (loss) on a per share basis.
operating return on equity
the ratio of operating
income to average equity excluding net unrealized investment gains and losses
and discontinued operations, net of tax.
paid loss development method
an actuarial method to
estimate ultimate losses for a given cohort of claims such as an accident
year/product line component. if the paid-to-date losses are then subtracted
from the estimated ultimate losses, the result is an indication of the unpaid
losses.
the basic premise of the
method is that cumulative paid losses for a given cohort of claims will grow
in a stable, predictable pattern from year-to-year, based on the age of the
cohort. these age-to-age growth factors are sometimes called link ratios.
for example, if
cumulative paid losses for a product line xyz for accident year 2004 were
$100 as of december31, 2004 (12 months after the start of that accident
year), then grew to $120 as of december31, 2005 (24 months after the
start), the link ratio for that accident year from 12 to 24 months would be
1.20. if the link ratio for other recent accident years from 12 to 24 months
for that product line were also at or around 1.20, then the method would
assume a similar result for the most recent accident year, i.e., that it too
would have its cumulative paid losses grow 120% from the 12 month to 24 month
valuation.
this is repeated for
each age-to-age period into the future until the age-to-age link ratios for
future periods are assumed to be 1.0 (i.e., the age at which cumulative
losses are assumed to have stopped growing).
a given accident years
cumulative losses are then projected to ultimate by multiplying current
cumulative losses by successive age-to-age link ratios up to that future age
where growth is expected to end. for example, if growth is expected to end at
60 months, then the ultimate indication for an accident year with cumulative
losses at 12 months equals those losses times a 12 to 24 month link ratio,
times a 24 to 36 month link ratio, times a 36 to 48 month link ratio, times a
48 to 60 month link ratio.
advanced applications of
the method include adjustments for changing conditions during the historical
period and anticipated changes in the future.
pool
an organization of
insurers or reinsurers through which particular types of risks are
underwritten with premiums, losses and expenses being shared in agreed-upon
percentages.
premiums
the amount charged
during the year on policies and contracts issued, renewed or reinsured by an
insurance company.
producer
contractual entity which
directs insureds to the insurer for coverage. this term includes agents and
brokers.
property insurance
insurance that provides
coverage to a person or business with an insurable interest in tangible
property for that persons or businesss property loss, damage or loss of
use.
quota share reinsurance
reinsurance wherein the
insurer cedes an agreed-upon fixed percentage of liabilities, premiums and
losses for each policy covered on a pro rata basis.
rates
amounts charged per unit
of insurance.
redundancy
with regard to reserves
for a given liability, a redundancy exists when it is estimated or determined
that the reserves are greater than what will be needed to pay the ultimate
settlement value of the related liabilities. where the redundancy is the
result of an estimate, the estimated amount of redundancy (or even the
finding of whether or not a redundancy exists) may change as new information
becomes available.
reinstatement premiums
additional premiums
payable to reinsurers to restore coverage limits that have been exhausted as
a result of reinsured losses under certain excess of loss reinsurance
treaties.
reinsurance
the practice whereby one
insurer, called the reinsurer, in consideration of a premium paid to that
insurer, agrees to indemnify another insurer, called the ceding company, for
part or all of the liability of the ceding company under one or more policies
or contracts of insurance which it has issued.
reinsurance agreement
a contract specifying
the terms of a reinsurance transaction.
reported claim development method
an actuarial method to estimate ultimate claim counts for a given cohort of
claims such as an accident year/product line component. if the
reported-to-date counts are then subtracted from the estimated ultimate
counts, the result is an indication of the ibnr counts.
the approach is the same
as that described in this glossary under the paid loss development method,
but based on the growth in cumulative claim counts rather than paid losses. the
basic premise of the method is that cumulative claim counts for a given
cohort of claims will grow in a stable, predictable pattern from
year-to-year, based on the age of the cohort.
residual market (involuntary business)
insurance market which provides coverage for risks for those unable to
purchase insurance in the voluntary market. possible reasons for this
inability include the risk being too great or the profit potential too small
under the required insurance rate structure. residual markets are frequently
created by state legislation either because of lack of available coverage
such as: property coverage in a windstorm prone area or protection of the
accident victim as in the case of workers compensation. the costs of the
residual market are usually charged back to the direct insurance carriers in
proportion to the carriers voluntary market shares for the type of coverage
involved.
retention
the amount of exposure a
policyholder company retains on any one risk or group of risks. the term may
apply to an insurance policy, where the policyholder is an individual, family
or business, or a reinsurance policy, where the policyholder is an insurance
company.
retention ratio
current period renewal
premiums, accounts or policies as a percentage of total premiums, accounts or
policies available for renewal.
retrospective premiums
premiums related to
retrospectively rated policies.
retrospective rating
a plan or method which
permits adjustment of the final premium or commission on the basis of actual
loss experience, subject to certain minimum and maximum limits.
return on equity
the ratio of net income
to average equity.
risk-based capital (rbc)
a measure adopted by the
naic and enacted by states for determining the minimum statutory capital and
surplus requirements of insurers. insurers having total adjusted capital less
than that required by the rbc calculation will be subject to varying degrees
of regulatory action depending on the level of capital inadequacy.
risk retention group
an alternative form of
insurance in which members of a similar profession or business band together
to self insure their risks.
run-off business
an operation which has
been determined to be nonstrategic; includes non-renewals of inforce policies
and a cessation of writing new business, where allowed by law.
salvage
the amount of money an
insurer recovers through the sale of property transferred to the insurer as a
result of a loss payment.
s-curve method
a mathematical function
which depicts an initial slow change, followed by a rapid change and then
ending in a slow change again. this results in an s shaped line when
depicted graphically. the actuarial application of these curves fit the
reported data to-date for a particular cohort of claims to an s-curve to
project future activity for that cohort.
second-injury fund
the employer of an
injured, impaired worker is responsible only for the workers compensation
benefit for the most recent injury; the second-injury fund would cover the
cost of any additional benefits for aggravation of a prior condition. the
cost is shared by the insurance industry and self-insureds, funded through
assessments to insurance companies and self-insureds based on either premiums
or losses.
self-insured retentions
that portion of the risk
retained by a person for its own account.
servicing carrier
an insurance company
that provides, for a fee, various services including policy issuance, claims
adjusting and customer service for insureds in a reinsurance pool.
statutory accounting practices (sap)
the practices and procedures prescribed or permitted by domiciliary state
insurance regulatory authorities in the united states for recording
transactions and preparing financial statements. statutory accounting
practices generally reflect a modified going concern basis of accounting.
statutory surplus
as determined under sap,
the amount remaining after all liabilities, including loss reserves, are
subtracted from all admitted assets. admitted assets are assets of an insurer
prescribed or permitted by a state to be recognized on the statutory balance
sheet. statutory surplus is also referred to as surplus or surplus as
regards policyholders for statutory accounting purposes.
structured settlements
periodic payments to an
injured person or survivor for a determined number of years or for life,
typically in settlement of a claim under a liability policy, usually funded
through the purchase of an annuity.
subrogation
a principle of law
incorporated in insurance policies, which enables an insurance company, after
paying a claim under a policy, to recover the amount of the loss from another
who is legally liable for it.
third-party liability
a liability owed to a
claimant (third party) who is not one of the two parties to the insurance
contract. insured liability claims are referred to as third-party claims.
treaty reinsurance
the reinsurance of a
specified type or category of risks defined in a reinsurance agreement (a
treaty) between a primary insurer or other reinsured and a reinsurer.
typically, in treaty reinsurance, the primary insurer or reinsured is
obligated to offer and the reinsurer is obligated to accept a specified
portion of all that type or category of risks originally written by the
primary insurer or reinsured.
umbrella coverage
a form of insurance
protection against losses in excess of amounts covered by other liability
insurance policies or amounts not covered by the usual liability policies.
unassigned surplus
the undistributed and
unappropriated amount of statutory surplus.
underwriter
an employee of an
insurance company who examines, accepts or rejects risks and classifies
accepted risks in order to charge an appropriate premium for each accepted
risk. the underwriter is expected to select business that will produce an
average risk of loss no greater than that anticipated for the class of
business.
underwriting
the insurers or
reinsurers process of reviewing applications for insurance coverage, and the
decision as to whether to accept all or part of the coverage and
determination of the applicable premiums; also refers to the acceptance of
that coverage.
underwriting expense ratio
for sap, it is the ratio
of underwriting expenses incurred less other income to net written premiums.
for gaap, it is the ratio of underwriting expenses incurred reduced by an
allocation of fee income and billing and policy fees to net earned premiums.
underwriting gain or loss
net earned premiums and
fee income less claims and claim adjustment expenses and insurance-related
expenses.
unearned premium
the portion of premiums
written that is allocable to the unexpired portion of the policy term.
voluntary market
the market in which a
person seeking insurance obtains coverage without the assistance of residual
market mechanisms.
wholesale broker
an independent or
exclusive agent that represents both admitted and nonadmitted insurers in
market areas, which include standard, non-standard, specialty and excess and
surplus lines of insurance. the wholesaler does not deal directly with the
insurance consumer. the wholesaler deals with the retail agent or broker.
workers
compensation
a system (established under state and federal laws)
under which employers provide insurance for benefit payments to their
employees for work-related injuries, deaths and diseases, regardless of
fault.
item
1a. risk factors
you should carefully
consider the following risks and all of the other information set forth in this
report, including our consolidated financial statements and the notes thereto.
catastrophe losses could
materially reduce our profitability and adversely impact our ratings, our
ability to raise capital and the availability and cost of reinsurance. our
property and casualty insurance operations expose us to claims arising out of
catastrophes. catastrophes can be caused by various natural events, including
hurricanes, windstorms, earthquakes, hail, severe winter weather and fires.
catastrophes can also be man-made, such as a terrorist attack (including those
involving nuclear, biological, chemical or radiological events) or a
consequence of war or political instability. the geographic distribution of our
business subjects us to catastrophe exposure from hurricanes in the northeast,
florida, gulf coast and mid-atlantic regions, as well as catastrophe exposure
from earthquakes in california and the new madrid and pacific northwest
regions. the incidence and severity of catastrophes are inherently
unpredictable. over the last several years, changing climate conditions have
added to the unpredictability and frequency of natural disasters in certain
parts of the world and created additional uncertainty as to future trends and
exposures. it is possible that both the frequency and severity of natural and
man-made catastrophic events will increase. in particular, we expect that the
trend of increased severity and frequency of storms experienced in 2005 and 2004,
although not evident in 2006, may continue in the foreseeable future.
the extent of losses from
a catastrophe is a function of both the total amount of insured exposure in the
area affected by the event and the severity of the event. states have from time
to time passed legislation that has the effect of limiting the ability of
insurers to manage catastrophe risk, such as legislation prohibiting insurers
from withdrawing from catastrophe-prone areas. in addition, following
catastrophes, there are sometimes legislative initiatives and court decisions
which seek to expand insurance coverage for catastrophe claims beyond the
original intent of the policies. also, our ability to increase pricing to the
extent necessary to offset rising costs of catastrophes, particularly in the
personal insurance segment, requires approval of regulatory authorities of
certain states. our ability or our willingness to raise pricing, modify
underwriting terms or reduce exposure to certain geographies may be limited due
to considerations of public policy, the evolving political environment and/or
social responsibilities. we also may choose to write business we might not
otherwise write for strategic purposes, such as improving our access to other
underwriting opportunities.
there are also risks which
impact the estimation of ultimate costs for catastrophes. for example, the
estimation of reserves related to hurricanes can be affected by the inability
by us and our insureds to access portions of the impacted areas, the complexity
of factors contributing to the losses, the legal and regulatory uncertainties
and the nature of the information available to establish the reserves. complex
factors include, but are not limited to: determining whether damage was caused
by flooding versus wind; evaluating general liability and pollution exposures;
estimating additional living expenses; the impact of demand surge;
infrastructure disruption; fraud; the effect of mold damage and business
interruption costs; and reinsurance collectibility. the timing of a
catastrophes occurrence, such as at or near the end of a reporting period, can
also affect the information available to us in estimating reserves for that
reporting period. the estimates related to catastrophes are adjusted as actual
claims emerge.
catastrophe losses could
materially and adversely affect our results of operations for any fiscal
quarter or year and may materially harm our financial condition, which in turn
could adversely affect our financial strength and claims-paying ratings and could
impair our ability to raise capital on acceptable terms or at all. also, rating
agencies may further increase their capital requirements, which may require us
to raise capital to maintain our ratings or adversely affect our ratings. in
addition, catastrophic events could cause us to exhaust our available
reinsurance limits and could adversely impact the cost and availability of
reinsurance.
for our exposure to
catastrophe losses from acts of terrorism, we have limited terrorism coverage
in our reinsurance program, and although the terrorism risk insurance extension
act of 2005 provides
benefits
in the event of certain acts of terrorism, it may not be extended beyond 2007
or its benefits may be reduced. given the unpredictable frequency and severity
of terrorism losses, as well as the limited terrorism coverage in our own
reinsurance program, future losses from acts of terrorism, particularly those
involving nuclear, biological, chemical or radiological events, could
materially and adversely affect our results of operations, financial condition
and/or liquidity in future periods, particularly if the terrorism act is not
extended.
if actual claims exceed
our loss reserves, or if changes in the estimated level of loss reserves are
necessary, our financial results could be significantly and adversely affected. claim and claim adjustment
expense reserves (loss reserves) represent managements estimate of ultimate
unpaid costs of losses and loss adjustment expenses for claims that have been
reported and claims that have been incurred but not yet reported. loss reserves
do not represent an exact calculation of liability, but instead represent
management estimates, generally utilizing actuarial expertise and projection
techniques, at a given accounting date. these loss reserve estimates are
expectations of what the ultimate settlement and administration of claims will
cost upon final resolution in the future, based on our assessment of facts and
circumstances then known, review of historical settlement patterns, estimates
of trends in claims severity and frequency, expected interpretations of legal
theories of liability and other factors. in establishing reserves, we also take
into account estimated recoveries from reinsurance, salvage and subrogation.
the process of estimating
loss reserves involves a high degree of judgment and is subject to a number of
variables. these variables can be affected by both internal and external
events, such as changes in claims handling procedures, economic inflation,
legal trends and legislative changes, among others. the impact of many of these
items on ultimate costs for claims and claim adjustment expenses is difficult
to estimate. loss reserve estimation difficulties also differ significantly by
product line due to differences in claim complexity, the volume of claims, the
potential severity of individual claims, the determination of occurrence date
for a claim and reporting lags (the time between the occurrence of the
policyholder event and when it is actually reported to the insurer).
we continually refine our loss reserve estimates in a
regular ongoing process as historical loss experience develops and additional
claims are reported and settled. informed judgment is applied throughout the
process, including the application, on a consistent basis over time, of various
individual experiences and expertise to multiple sets of data and
analyses. different experts may choose
different assumptions when faced with material uncertainty, based on their
individual backgrounds, professional experiences and areas of focus. hence, such experts may at times produce
estimates materially different from each other.
experts providing input to the various estimates and underlying
assumptions include actuaries, underwriters, claim personnel and lawyers, as
well as other company management. therefore, management may have to consider
varying individual viewpoints as part of its estimation of loss reserves.
we rigorously attempt to
consider all significant facts and circumstances known at the time loss
reserves are established. due to the inherent uncertainty underlying loss
reserve estimates including but not limited to the future settlement
environment, final resolution of the estimated liability will be different from
that anticipated at the reporting date. therefore, actual paid losses in the
future may yield a materially different amount than currently reservedfavorable
or unfavorable.
because of the
uncertainties set forth above, additional liabilities may arise for amounts in
excess of the current related reserves. in addition, our estimate of claims and
claim adjustment expenses may change. these additional liabilities or increases
in estimates, or a range of either, cannot now be reasonably estimated and
could materially and adversely affect our results of operations or financial
condition in future periods.
for a discussion of claims
and claim adjustment expense reserves by product line, including examples of
common factors that can affect required reserves, see item7managements
discussion and analysis
of financial
condition and results of operationscritical accounting estimatesclaims and
claim adjustment expense reserves.
our business could be harmed because of our potential
exposure to asbestos and environmental claims and related litigation.
asbestos claims. we
believe that the property and casualty insurance industry has suffered from
court decisions and other trends that have attempted to expand insurance
coverage for asbestos claims far beyond the intent of insurers and
policyholders. while we have experienced a decrease in asbestos claims over the
past two years, we continue to receive a significant number of asbestos claims
from our policyholders (which includes others seeking coverage under a policy),
including claims against our policyholders by individuals who do not appear to
be impaired by asbestos exposure. factors underlying these claim filings
include intensive advertising by lawyers seeking asbestos claimants, the focus
by plaintiffs on new and previously peripheral defendants and entities seeking
bankruptcy protection as a result of asbestos-related liabilities. in addition
to contributing to the overall number of claims, bankruptcy proceedings may
increase the volatility of asbestos-related losses by initially delaying the
reporting of claims and later by significantly accelerating and increasing loss
payments by insurers, including us. bankruptcy proceedings have also caused
increased settlement demands against those policyholders who are not in
bankruptcy but that remain in the tort system. recently, in many jurisdictions,
those who allege very serious injury and who can present credible medical
evidence of their injuries are receiving priority trial settings in the courts,
while those who have not shown any credible disease manifestation have their
hearing dates delayed or placed on an inactive docket. this trend of
prioritizing claims involving credible evidence of injuries, along with the
focus on new and previously peripheral defendants, contributes to the loss and
loss expense payments experienced by us. in addition, our asbestos-related loss
and loss expense experience is impacted by the exhaustion or unavailability due
to insolvency of other insurance potentially available to policyholders along
with the insolvency or bankruptcy of other defendants.
we continue to be involved
in coverage litigation concerning a number of policyholders, some of whom have
filed for bankruptcy, including, among others, acands,inc., who in some
instances have asserted that all or a portion of their asbestos-related claims
are not subject to aggregate limits on coverage. (see item3legal
proceedings). in these instances, policyholders also may assert that each
individual bodily injury claim should be treated as a separate occurrence under
the policy. it is difficult to predict whether these policyholders will be
successful on both issues. to the extent both issues are resolved in
policyholders favor and our other defenses are not successful, our coverage
obligations under the policies at issue would be materially increased and
bounded only by the applicable per-occurrence limits and the number of asbestos
bodily injury claims against the policyholders. accordingly, although we have
seen a moderation in the overall risk associated with these lawsuits, it remains
difficult to predict the ultimate cost of these claims.
many coverage disputes
with policyholders are only resolved through settlement agreements. because
many policyholders make exaggerated demands, it is difficult to predict the
outcome of settlement negotiations. settlements involving bankrupt
policyholders may include extensive releases which are favorable to us but
which could result in settlements for larger amounts than originally
anticipated. there also may be instances where a court may not approve a
proposed settlement, which may result in additional litigation and potentially
less beneficial outcomes for us. as in the past, we will continue to pursue
settlement opportunities.
in addition, proceedings
have been launched directly against insurers, including us, challenging
insurers conduct in respect of asbestos claims, and claims by individuals
seeking damages arising from alleged asbestos-related bodily injuries. other
direct actions against insurers, including us, could be filed in the future. it
is difficult to predict the outcome of these proceedings, including whether the
plaintiffs will be able to sustain these actions against insurers based on
novel legal theories of liability.
environmental claims. we
continue to receive claims from policyholders who allege that they are liable
for injury or damage arising out of their alleged disposition of toxic
substances. mostly, these claims are due to various legislative as well as
regulatory efforts aimed at environmental remediation. for instance, the
comprehensive environmental response, compensation and liability act (cercla),
enacted in 1980 and later modified, enables private parties as well as federal
and state governments to take action with respect to releases and threatened
releases of hazardous substances. this federal statute permits the recovery of
response costs from some liable parties and may require liable parties to
undertake their own remedial action. liability under cercla may be joint and several
with other responsible parties.
we have been, and continue
to be, involved in litigation involving insurance coverage issues pertaining to
environmental claims. we believe that some court decisions have interpreted the
insurance coverage to be broader than the original intent of the insurers and
policyholders. these decisions often pertain to insurance policies that were
issued by us prior to the mid-1970s. these decisions continue to be
inconsistent and vary from jurisdiction to jurisdiction. environmental claims
when submitted rarely indicate the monetary amount being sought by the claimant
from the policyholder, and we do not keep track of the monetary amount being
sought in those few claims which indicate a monetary amount.
asbestos and environmental claims. as
a result of the processes and procedures described in item7managements discussion and analysis of
financial condition and results of operations, management believes that
the reserves carried for asbestos and environmental claims at december31,
2006 are appropriately established based upon known facts, current law and
managements judgment. however, the uncertainties surrounding the final
resolution of these claims continue, and it is difficult to determine the
ultimate exposure for asbestos and environmental claims and related litigation.
as a result, these reserves are subject to revision as new information becomes
available and as claims develop. the continuing uncertainties include, without
limitation, the risks and lack of predictability inherent in complex
litigation, any impact from the bankruptcy protection sought by various
asbestos producers and other asbestos defendants, a further increase or
decrease in asbestos and environmental claims beyond that which is anticipated,
the role of any umbrella or excess policies we have issued, the resolution or
adjudication of some disputes pertaining to the amount of available coverage
for asbestos and environmental claims in a manner inconsistent with our
previous assessment of these claims, the number and outcome of direct actions
against us and future developments pertaining to our ability to recover
reinsurance for asbestos and environmental claims. in addition, our
asbestos-related claims and claim adjustment expense experience has been
impacted by the exhaustion or unavailability due to insolvency of other
insurance sources potentially available to policyholders along with the
insolvency or bankruptcy of other defendants, although we have noted a recent
decrease in the number and volatility of asbestos-related bankruptcies. it is
also not possible to predict changes in the legal and legislative environment
and their impact on the future development of asbestos and environmental
claims. this development will be affected by future court decisions and interpretations,
as well as changes in applicable legislation, including legislation related to
asbestos reform. it is also difficult to predict the ultimate outcome of large
coverage disputes until settlement negotiations near completion and significant
legal questions are resolved or, failing settlement, until the dispute is
adjudicated. this is particularly the case with policyholders in bankruptcy
where negotiations often involve a large number of claimants and other parties
and require court approval to be effective. as part of its continuing analysis
of asbestos reserves, which includes an annual review of asbestos
policyholders, we continue to study the implications of these and other
developments. we completed our most recent annual review during the third
quarter of 2006. see the asbestos claims and litigation and environmental
claims and litigation sections of managements discussion and analysis of
financial condition and results of operations. also see item3legal
proceedings.
a portion of our loss
reserves are for asbestos and environmental claims and related litigation which
aggregated $4.47 billion at december31, 2006. while the ongoing study of
asbestos and environmental
claims
and associated liabilities considers the inconsistencies of court decisions as
to coverage, plaintiffs expanded theories of liability and the risks inherent
in complex litigation and other uncertainties, in the opinion of our
management, it is possible that the outcome of the continued uncertainties
regarding these claims could result in liability in future periods that differs
from current reserves by an amount that could be material to our operating
results in future periods. see item7managements discussion and
analysis of financial condition and results of operationsasbestos claims and
litigation and managements discussion and analysis of financial condition
and results of operationsenvironmental claims and litigation.
we are exposed to, and may
face adverse developments involving, mass tort claims such as those relating to
exposure to potentially harmful products or substances. in
addition to asbestos and environmental pollution, we face exposure to other
types of mass tort claims, including claims related to exposure to potentially
harmful products or substances, including lead paint, silica and welding rod
fumes. establishing claim and claim adjustment expense reserves for mass tort
claims is subject to uncertainties because of many factors, including expanded
theories of liability, disputes concerning medical causation with respect to
certain diseases, geographical concentration of the lawsuits asserting the
claims and the potential for a large rise in the total number of claims without
underlying epidemiological developments suggesting an increase in disease
rates. moreover, evolving judicial interpretations regarding the application of
various tort theories and defenses, including application of various theories
of joint and several liabilities, as well as the application of insurance
coverage to these claims, impede our ability to estimate our ultimate liability
for such claims.
because of the uncertainties
set forth above, additional liabilities may arise for amounts in excess of the
current related reserves. in addition, our estimate of claims and claim
adjustment expenses may change. these additional liabilities or increases in
estimates, or a range of either, cannot now be reasonably estimated and could
materially and adversely affect our results of operations in future periods.
the effects of emerging
claim and coverage issues on our business are uncertain. as
industry practices and legal, judicial, social and other environmental
conditions change, unexpected and unintended issues related to claim and
coverage may emerge. these issues may adversely affect our business by either
extending coverage beyond our underwriting intent or by increasing the number
or size of claims. examples of emerging claims and coverage issues include:
adverse
changes in loss cost trends, including inflationary pressures in medical costs
and auto and home repair costs;
judicial
expansion of policy coverage and the impact of new theories of liability;
a
growing trend of plaintiffs targeting property and casualty insurers, including
us, in purported class action litigation relating to claim-handling and other
practices;
increases
in the number and size of claims relating to construction defects, which often
present complex coverage and damage valuation questions;
increases
in the number and size of claims related to expenses for testing and
remediation of mold conditions; and
claims
from directors and officers insurance relating to possible accounting
irregularities, corporate governance issues and stock option backdating,
spring-loading and other option grant practices.
the effects of these and
other unforeseen emerging claim and coverage issues are extremely hard to
predict and could harm our business and materially adversely affect our results
of operations in future periods.
reinsurance may not
protect us against losses. we
use reinsurance to help manage our exposure to property and casualty risks. the
availability and cost of reinsurance are subject to prevailing market
conditions, both in terms of price and available capacity, which can affect our
business volume and profitability. although the reinsurer is liable to us to
the extent of the ceded reinsurance, we remain liable as the direct insurer on
all risks reinsured. as a result, ceded reinsurance arrangements do not
eliminate our obligation to pay claims. accordingly, we are subject to credit
risk with respect to our ability to recover amounts due from reinsurers. in
addition, some of our reinsurance claims may be disputed by the reinsurers, and
we may ultimately receive partial or no payment. this is a particular risk in
the case of claims that relate to insurance policies written many years ago,
including those relating to asbestos and environmental claims. reinsurance may
not protect us against losses and may not be available to us in the future at
commercially reasonable rates or at all.
the insurance industry is
the subject of a number of investigations by state and federal authorities in
the united states. we cannot predict the outcome of these investigations or the
impact on our business or financial results. as part of ongoing,
industry-wide investigations, we and our affiliates have received subpoenas and
written requests for information from government agencies and authorities,
including from the attorneys general of numerous states, various states
insurance and business regulators and the securities and exchange commission.
the areas of pending inquiry addressed to us include our relationship with
brokers and agents and our involvement with non-traditional insurance and
reinsurance products. we and our affiliates may receive additional subpoenas
and requests for information with respect to these or other areas from
government agencies or authorities. we are cooperating with these subpoenas and
requests for information. for further information, see item3legal
proceedings.
it would be premature to
reach any conclusions as to the likely outcome of these matters or the impact
on our business or financial results. potential outcomes could include
enforcement proceedings or settlements resulting in fines, penalties and/or
changes in business practices that could adversely affect our results of
operations. in addition, these investigations may result in changes in laws and
regulations affecting the industry in general which could, in turn, also
adversely affect our results of operations.
our businesses are heavily
regulated and changes in regulation may reduce our profitability and limit our
growth. we are extensively regulated and
supervised in the jurisdictions in which we conduct business, including
licensing and supervision by government regulatory agencies in such
jurisdictions. this regulatory system is generally designed to protect the
interests of policyholders, and not necessarily the interests of insurers,
their shareholders and other investors. this regulatory system also addresses
authorization for lines of business, capital and surplus requirements,
limitations on the types and amounts of certain investments, underwriting
limitations, transactions with affiliates, dividend limitations, changes in
control, premium rates and a variety of other financial and non-financial
components of an insurers business.
in recent years, the state
insurance regulatory framework has come under increased federal scrutiny, and
some state legislatures have considered or enacted laws that may alter or
increase state authority to regulate insurance companies and insurance holding
companies. further, the national association of insurance commissioners (naic)
and state insurance regulators continually reexamine existing laws and
regulations, specifically focusing on modifications to holding company
regulations, interpretations of existing laws and the development of new laws
and regulations. in addition, congress and some federal agencies from time to
time investigate the current condition of insurance regulation in the united
states to determine whether to impose federal or national regulation or to
allow an optional federal charter, similar to the option available to most
banks. we cannot predict with certainty the effect any proposed or future
legislation or naic initiatives may have on the conduct of our business.
insurance laws or regulations that are adopted or amended may be more
restrictive than current requirements or may result in higher costs.
although the united states
federal government does not directly regulate the insurance business, changes
in federal legislation, regulation and/or administrative policies in several
areas, including changes
in
financial services regulation (e.g. the repeal of the mccarran-ferguson act)
and federal taxation, can significantly harm the insurance industry, including
us.
a downgrade in our
claims-paying and financial strength ratings could significantly reduce our
business volumes, adversely impact our ability to access the capital markets
and increase our borrowing costs. claims-paying
and financial strength ratings have become increasingly important to an
insurers competitive position. rating agencies review their ratings
periodically, and our current ratings may not be maintained in the future. a
downgrade in one or more of our ratings could negatively impact our business
volumes, because demand for certain of our products in certain markets may be
reduced or our ratings could fall below minimum levels required to maintain
existing business. additionally, we may find it more difficult to access the
capital markets and higher borrowing costs may be incurred. if our capital
position were to deteriorate or one or more rating agencies were to
substantially increase their capital requirements, we may need to raise equity
capital in the future in order to maintain our ratings or limit the extent of a
downgrade. for example, the frequency or severity of weather-related
catastrophes in the last two years may lead rating agencies to substantially
increase their capital requirements. the ratings are not in any way a measure
of protection offered to investors in our securities and should not be relied
upon with respect to making an investment in our securities. for further
discussion about our ratings, see, item1businessratings.
our investment portfolio
may suffer reduced returns or losses which could reduce our profitability. investment
returns are an important part of our overall profitability. accordingly,
fluctuations in the fixed income or equity markets could impair our
profitability.
fluctuations in interest
rates affect our returns on, and the market value of, fixed income and
short-term investments, which comprised approximately 94% of the market value
of our investment portfolio as of december31, 2006. in addition, defaults
by third parties, primarily from investments in liquid corporate and municipal
bonds, who fail to pay or perform on their obligations could reduce our net
investment income and net realized investment gains or result in investment
losses.
we invest a portion of our
assets in equity and real estate related investments, which are subject to
greater volatility than fixed income investments. general economic conditions,
stock market conditions and many other factors beyond our control can adversely
affect the value of our equity and real estate related investments and the
realization of net investment income. as a result of these factors, we may not
realize an adequate return on our investments, may incur losses on sales of our
investments and may be required to write down the value of our investments,
which would adversely affect our profitability.
the intense competition
that we face could harm our ability to maintain or increase our profitability
and premium volume. the property and casualty
insurance industry is highly competitive, and we believe that it will remain
highly competitive in the foreseeable future. we compete with both domestic and
foreign insurers, some of which have greater financial resources than we do. in
addition, several property and casualty insurers writing commercial lines of
business now offer products for alternative forms of risk protection, including
large deductible programs and various forms of self-insurance that utilize
captive insurance companies and risk retention groups. continued growth in
alternative forms of risk protection could reduce our premium volume. following
the terrorist attack on september11, 2001 and again following the
hurricane activity in 2004 and 2005, a number of new insurers and reinsurers
were formed to compete in the industry, and a number of existing market
participants have raised new capital which may enhance their ability to
compete.
our
competitive position is based on many factors, including:
our
perceived overall financial strength,
ratings
assigned by independent rating agencies,
geographic
scope of business,
agent,
broker and client relationships,
premiums
charged, contract terms and conditions, products and services offered
(including the ability to design customized programs),
speed
of claims payment,
reputation,
experience and qualifications of employees,
local
presence and
our
ability to keep pace relative to competitors with changes in technology and
information systems.
we may have difficulty in
continuing to compete successfully on any of these bases in the future. if
competition limits our ability to write new business at adequate rates, our
results of operations will be adversely affected. see item1businesscompetition.
the inability of our
insurance subsidiaries to pay dividends to us in sufficient amounts would harm
our ability to meet our obligations and to pay future dividends. we
are a holding company and rely in part on dividends from our insurance
subsidiaries to meet our obligations for payment of interest and principal on
outstanding debt obligations and to pay dividends to shareholders and corporate
expenses. the ability of our insurance subsidiaries to pay dividends to us in
the future will depend on their statutory surplus, earnings and regulatory
restrictions.
we and our insurance
subsidiaries are subject to regulation by some states as an insurance holding
company system. this regulation generally provides that transactions among
companies within the holding company system must be fair and reasonable.
transfers of assets among affiliated companies, certain dividend payments from
insurance subsidiaries and certain material transactions between companies
within the system may require prior notice to, or prior approval by, state
regulatory authorities. our insurance subsidiaries are subject to various
regulatory restrictions that limit the maximum amount of dividends available to
be paid to their parent without prior approval of insurance regulatory
authorities. the ability of our insurance subsidiaries to pay dividends to us
also is restricted by regulations that set standards of solvency that must be
met and maintained, the nature of and limitation on investments, the nature of
and limitations on dividends to policyholders and shareholders, the nature and
extent of required participation in insurance guaranty funds and the
involuntary assumption of hard-to-place or high-risk insurance business,
primarily in workers compensation insurance lines. the inability of our
insurance subsidiaries to pay dividends to us in an amount sufficient to meet
our debt service obligations and other cash requirements could harm our ability
to meet our obligations and to pay future dividends.
assessments and other
surcharges for guaranty funds, second-injury funds, catastrophe funds and other
mandatory pooling arrangements may reduce our profitability. virtually
all states require insurers licensed to do business in their state to bear a
portion of the loss suffered by some insureds as the result of impaired or
insolvent insurance companies. guaranty fund assessments have leveled off in
the recent year and, in certain states, have begun to decrease. these
assessments may, however, increase in the future if additional insolvencies
occur. many states also have laws that established second-injury funds to
provide compensation to injured employees for aggravation of a prior condition
or injury which are funded by either assessments based on paid losses or
premium surcharge mechanisms. in addition, as a condition to the ability to
conduct business in various states, our insurance subsidiaries must participate
in mandatory property and casualty shared-market mechanisms or pooling
arrangements, which provide various types of insurance coverage to individuals
or other entities that otherwise are unable to purchase that coverage from
private insurers. the effect of these assessments and mandatory shared-market
mechanisms or changes in them could adversely affect profitability or limit our
ability to grow our business.
loss or significant
restriction of the use of credit scoring in the pricing and underwriting of personal
insurance products could reduce our future profitability. in
personal insurance, we use credit scoring as a factor in pricing decisions
where allowed by state law. some consumer groups and regulators have
questioned whether
the use of credit scoring unfairly discriminates against people with low
incomes, minority groups and the elderly and are calling for the prohibition or
restriction on the use of credit scoring in underwriting and pricing. laws or
regulations that significantly curtail the use of credit scoring, if enacted in
a large number of states, could adversely affect our future profitability.
disruptions to our
relationships with our distributors, independent agents and brokers could
adversely affect us. we market our insurance
products primarily through independent agents and brokers. an important part of
our business is written through fewer than a dozen such intermediaries. loss of
all or a substantial portion of the business provided through such agents and
brokers could adversely affect our future business volume and profitability.
we discontinued paying
contingent commissions on excess casualty and umbrella business effective
september30, 2006. in addition, we discontinued paying contingent
commissions for homeowners multi-peril, private passenger automobile physical
damage, private passenger automobile no-fault, other private passenger
automobile liability, boiler and machinery and financial guaranty insurance
lines effective january1, 2007. we have developed alternative
compensation arrangements for these lines of business that compensate our
brokers and agents in a manner that differentiates for business performance and
is consistent with all applicable laws.should these alternative compensation
arrangements not be accepted in the marketplace, the resulting loss of business
could adversely affect our future business volume and profitability.
we increasingly rely on
internet applications for the marketing and sale of certain of its products
through independent agents and brokers. in addition, in some instances, those
agents and brokers are required to access separate business platforms to
execute the sale of our respective personal insurance or commercial insurance
products. should internet disruptions occur, or frustration with our business
platforms develop among our independent agents and brokers, the loss of
business could adversely affect our future business volume and profitability.
if we experience
difficulties with outsourcing relationships, technology and/or data security
our ability to conduct our business might be negatively impacted. we outsource certain technology
functions to third parties and may do so increasingly in the future. if we do
not effectively develop and implement our outsourcing strategy, third party
providers do not perform as anticipated or we experience technological or other
problems with a transition, we may not realize productivity improvements or
cost efficiencies and may experience operational difficulties, increased costs
and a loss of business. in
addition, our ability to receive
services from third party providers outside of the united states might be
impacted by cultural differences, political instability, unanticipated
regulatory requirements or policies inside or outside of the united states. as
a result, our ability to conduct our business might be adversely affected.
while technology can
streamline many business processes and ultimately reduce the cost of
operations, technology initiatives present certain risks. our business is
highly dependent upon our employees ability to perform, in an efficient and
uninterrupted fashion, necessary business functions, such as internet support
and 24-hour call centers, processing new and renewal business, and
processing and paying claims. a shut-down of, or inability to, access one or
more of our facilities, a power outage, or a failure of one or more of our
information technology, telecommunications or other systems could significantly
impair our ability to perform such functions on a timely basis. in addition,
because our information technology and telecommunications systems interface
with and depend on third-party systems, we could experience service denials if
demand for such service exceeds capacity or a third-party system fails or
experiences an interruption. if sustained or repeated, such a business
interruption, system failure or service denial could result in a deterioration
of our ability to write and process new and renewal business, provide customer
service, pay claims in a timely manner or perform other necessary business
functions. computer viruses, hackers and other external hazards could expose
our data systems to security breaches. these increased risks and expanding
regulatory requirements could expose us to data loss, damages and
significant
increases in compliance costs. as a result, our ability to conduct our business
might be adversely affected.
item
1b. unresolved staff
comments
on july23, 2004, the
company announced that it was seeking guidance from the staff of the division
of corporation finance of the sec with respect to the appropriate purchase
accounting treatment for certain second quarter 2004 adjustments totaling $1.63
billion ($1.07 billion after-tax). the company recorded these adjustments as charges
in its consolidated statement of income in the second quarter of 2004. through
an informal comment process, the staff of the division of corporation finance
has subsequently asked for further information, which the company has provided.
specifically, the staff has asked for information concerning the companys
adjustments to certain of spcs insurance reserves and reserves for reinsurance
recoverables and premiums due from policyholders, and how those adjustments may
relate to spcs reserves for periods prior to the merger of spc and tpc. after
reviewing the staffs questions and comments and discussions with the companys
independent auditors, the company continues to believe that its accounting
treatment for these adjustments is appropriate. if, however, the staff
disagrees, some or all of the adjustments being discussed may not be recorded
as charges in the companys consolidated statement of income, thereby
increasing net income for the second quarter and full year 2004 and increasing
shareholders equity at december31, 2006, 2005 and 2004, in each case by
the approximate after-tax amount of the change. the effect on tangible
shareholders equity (adjusted for the effects of deferred taxes associated
with goodwill and intangible assets) at december31, 2006, 2005 and 2004
would not be material.
increases to goodwill and
deferred tax liabilities would be reflected on the companys balance sheet as
of april1, 2004, either due to purchase accounting or adjustment of spcs
reserves prior to the merger of spc and tpc. on may3, 2006, the company
received a letter from the division of enforcement of the sec (the division)
advising the company that it is conducting an inquiry relating to the second
quarter 2004 adjustments and the april1, 2004 merger between spc and tpc.
the company is cooperating with the divisions requests for information.
item
2. properties
the company owns its
corporate headquarters buildings located at 385 washington street and 130 west
sixth street, st. paul, minnesota. these buildings are adjacent to one another
and consist of approximately 1.1 million square feet of gross floor space.
the company also owns six
buildings in hartford, connecticut. the company currently occupies
approximately 1.8 million square feet of office space in these buildings. the
company also owns other real property, which includes office buildings in denver,
colorado, fall river, massachusetts and irving, texas, and a data center
located in norcross, georgia. in january2007, the company acquired a
building and adjacent land in windsor, connecticut. the company leases 196
field and claim offices totaling approximately 5.1 million square feet
throughout the united states under leases or subleases with third parties.
the company owns a
building in london, england, which houses a portion of its operations in the
united kingdom.
the company, through its subsidiaries, owns an
investment portfolio of income-producing properties and real estate funds.
included in this portfolio are four office buildings in which the company holds
a 50% ownership interest located in new york, new york, which collectively
accounted for approximately15% of the carrying value of the property
portfolio at december31, 2006.
in the opinion of the
companys management, the companys properties are adequate and suitable for
its business as presently conducted and are adequately maintained.
item 3. legal
proceedings
this section describes the
major pending legal proceedings, other than ordinary routine litigation
incidental to the business, to which the company or any of its subsidiaries is
a party or to which any of the companys property is subject.
asbestos- and
environmental-related proceedings
in the ordinary course of its insurance business, the
company receives claims for insurance arising under policies issued by the
company asserting alleged injuries and damages from asbestos, hazardous waste
and other toxic substances that are the subject of related coverage litigation,
including, among others, the litigation described below. the company continues
to be subject to aggressive asbestos-related litigation. the conditions
surrounding the final resolution of these claims and the related litigation
continue to change.
travelers property casualty corp. (tpc) is involved in
three significant proceedings (including a bankruptcy proceeding) relating to
acands,inc. (acands), formerly a national distributor and installer of
products containing asbestos. the proceedings involve disputes as to whether
and to what extent any of acands potential liabilities for current or future
bodily injury asbestos claims are covered by insurance policies issued by tpc. the
status of the various proceedings is described below.
acands filed for bankruptcy in september2002 (in re: acands,inc., pending in the
u.s. bankruptcy court for the district of delaware). in its proposed plan of
reorganization, acands sought to establish a trust to pay asbestos bodily
injury claims against it and sought to assign to the trust its rights under the
insurance policies issued by tpc. the proposed plan and disclosure statement
filed by acands claimed that acands had settled the vast majority of
asbestos-related bodily injury claims currently pending against it for
approximately $2.80 billion. acands asserts that, based on a prior agreement
between tpcand acands and acands interpretation of the july31,
2003 arbitration panel ruling described below, tpc is liable for 45% of the
$2.80 billion. on january26, 2004, the bankruptcy court issued a decision
rejecting confirmation of acands proposed plan of reorganization. the
bankruptcy court found, consistent with tpcs objections to acands proposed
plan, that the proposed plan was not fundamentally fair, was not proposed in
good faith and did not comply with section524(g)of the bankruptcy
code. acands has filed a notice of appeal of the bankruptcy courts decision
and has filed objections to the bankruptcy courts findings of fact and
conclusions of law in the united states district court. tpc has moved to
dismiss the appeal and objections and has also filed an opposition to acands
objections.
an arbitration was commenced in january2001 to
determine whether and to what extent acands financial obligations for bodily
injury asbestos claims are subject to insurance policy aggregate limits. on july31,
2003, the arbitration panel ruled in favor of tpc that asbestos bodily injury
claims against acands are subject to the aggregate limits of the policies
issued to acands, which have been exhausted. in october2003, acands
commenced a lawsuit seeking to vacate the arbitration award as beyond the panels
scope of authority (acands,inc. v.
travelers casualty and surety co., u.s.d.ct. e.d. pa.). on september16,
2004, the district court entered an order denying acands motion to vacate the
arbitration award. on january19, 2006, the united states court of appeals
for the third circuit reversed the district courts decision and declared the
arbitration award void on procedural grounds. on may22, 2006, the
united states supreme
court denied tpcs petition for a writ of certiorari seeking review of the
third circuits decision. as a result, the matter has been remanded to district
court and tpc has asked the district court to remand the arbitration to the
panel that initially ruled in favor of tpc for further proceedings consistent
with the third circuits decision. acands has opposed that request.
in the other proceeding, a related case pending before
the same court and commenced in september2000 (acands v. travelers casualty and surety co., u.s.d.ct., e.d.
pa.), acands sought a declaration of the extent to which the asbestos bodily
injury claims against acands are subject to occurrence limits under insurance
policies issued by tpc. tpc filed a motion to dismiss this action based upon
the july31, 2003 arbitration decision described above. the district court
found the dispute was moot as a result of the arbitration panels decision and
dismissed the case. as a result of the january19, 2006 ruling by the
third circuit and the supreme courts denial of certiorari, described in the
paragraph above, this case has been reinstated.
the company continues to believe it has meritorious
positions in these acands-related proceedings and intends to litigate
vigorously.
in october2001 and april2002, two
purported class action suits (wise v.
travelers and meningerv.travelers)
were filed against tpc and other insurers (not including spc) in state court in
west virginia. these cases were subsequently consolidated into a single
proceeding in the circuit court of kanawha county, west virginia. plaintiffs
allege that the insurer defendants engaged in unfair trade practices by
inappropriately handling and settling asbestos claims. the plaintiffs seek to
reopen large numbers of settled asbestos claims and to impose liability for
damages, including punitive damages, directly on insurers. lawsuits similar to wise were filed in massachusetts and
hawaii (these suits are collectively referred to as the statutory and hawaii
actions). also, in november2001, plaintiffs in consolidated asbestos
actions pending before a mass tort panel of judges in west virginia state court
moved to amend their complaint to name tpc as a defendant, alleging that tpc
and other insurers breached alleged duties to certain users of asbestos
products. in march2002, the court granted the motion to amend. plaintiffs
seek damages, including punitive damages. lawsuits seeking similar relief and
raising allegations similar to those presented in the west virginia amended
complaint are also pending in texas state court against tpc and spc, and in
louisiana state court against tpc (the claims asserted in these suits, together
with the west virginia suit, are collectively referred to as the common law
claims). lawsuits seeking similar relief in ohio have been dismissed.
all of the actions against tpc described in the
preceding paragraph, other than the hawaii actions, had been subject to a
temporary restraining order entered by the federal bankruptcy court in new york
that had previously presided over and approved the reorganization in bankruptcy
of tpcs former policyholder johns-manville corporation and affiliated entities.
in august2002, the bankruptcy court held a hearing on tpcs motion for a
preliminary injunction prohibiting further prosecution of the lawsuits pursuant
to the reorganization plan and related orders. at the conclusion of this
hearing, the court ordered the parties to mediation, appointed a mediator and
continued the temporary restraining order. during 2003, the same bankruptcy
court extended the existing injunction to apply to an additional set of cases filed
in various state courts in texas and ohio as well as to the attorneys who are
prosecuting these cases. the order also enjoined these attorneys and their
respective law firms from commencing any further lawsuits against tpc based
upon these allegations without the prior approval of the court. notwithstanding
the injunction, additional common law claims were filed and served on tpc.
on november19, 2003, the parties advised the
bankruptcy court that a settlement of the statutory and hawaii actions had been
reached. this settlement includes a lump-sum payment of up to $412 million by
tpc, subject to a number of significant contingencies. after continued meetings
with the mediator, the parties advised the bankruptcy court on may25,
2004 that a settlement resolving substantially all pending and similar future
common law claims against tpc had also been reached. this settlement requires a
payment of up to $90
million by tpc, subject to a number of significant contingencies. each of these
settlements is contingent upon, among other things, an order of the bankruptcy
court clarifying that all of these claims, and similar future asbestos-related
claims against tpc, are barred by prior orders entered by the bankruptcy court
in connection with the original johns-manville bankruptcy proceedings.
on august17, 2004, the bankruptcy court entered
an order approving the settlements and clarifying its prior orders that all of
the pending statutory and hawaii actions and substantially all common law
claims pending against tpc are barred. the order also applies to similar direct
action claims that may be filed in the future.
four appeals were taken from the august17, 2004
ruling. on march29, 2006, the u.s. district court for the southern
district of new york substantially affirmed the bankruptcy courts orders while
vacating that portion of the bankruptcy courts orders that required all future
direct actions against tpc to first be approved by the bankruptcy court before
proceeding in state or federal court. judgment was entered on march31,
2006.
five appeals from the march29, 2006 ruling were
filed in the u.s. court of appeals for the second circuit and tpc filed a
cross-appeal. two appellants voluntarily dismissed their appeals and a motion
to dismiss the cross-appeal was filed. additionally, tpc appealed from a
procedural order of the district court relating to the timeliness of the
cross-appeal. on january17, 2007, the second circuit dismissed tpcs
cross-appeal and denied tpcs appeal from the procedural order. the three
remaining principal appeals have been consolidated for disposition and remain
pending. it is not possible to predict how the appellate court will ruleon
the pending appeals. the company has no obligation to pay any of the settlement
amounts unless and until the orders and relief become final and are not subject
to any further appellate review.
spc, which is not covered by the bankruptcy court
rulings or the settlements described above, has numerous defenses in all of the
direct action cases asserting common law claims that are pending against it. spcs
defenses include the fact that these novel theories have no basis in law; that
they are directly at odds with the well-established law pertaining to the
insured/insurer relationship; that there is no generalized duty to warn as
alleged by the plaintiffs; and that the applicable statute of limitations as to
many of these claims has long since expired. many of these defenses have been
raised in initial motions to dismiss filed by spc and other insurers. there
have been favorable rulings during 2003 and 2004 in texas and during 2004 and
2005 in ohio on some of these motions filed by spc and other insurers that
dealt with statute of limitations and the validity of the alleged causes of
actions. on may26, 2005, the court of appeals of ohio, eighth district,
affirmed the earliest of these favorable rulings. in texas, only one court, in juneof
2005, has denied the insurers initial challenges to the pleadings. that ruling
was contrary to the rulings by other courts in similar cases, and spc and the
other insurer defendants have filed a mandamus petition with the texas court of
appeals.
the company is defending its asbestos- and
environmental-related litigation vigorously and believes that it has
meritorious defenses; however, the outcome of these disputes is uncertain. in
this regard, the company employs dedicated specialists and aggressive
resolution strategies to manage asbestos and environmental loss exposure,
including settling litigation under appropriate circumstances. for a discussion
of other information regarding the companys asbestos and environmental
exposure, see item7managements discussion and analysis of financial
condition and results of operationsasbestos claims and litigation, environmental
claims and litigation and uncertainty regarding adequacy of asbestos and
environmental reserves.
currently, it is not
possible to predict legal outcomes and their impact on the future development
of claims and litigation relating to asbestos and environmental claims. any
such development will be affected by future court decisions and
interpretations, as well as changes in applicable legislation. because of these
uncertainties, additional liabilities may arise for amounts in excess of the
current related reserves. in
addition,
the companys estimate of ultimate claims and claim adjustment expenses may
change. these additional liabilities or increases in estimates, or a range of
either, cannot now be reasonably estimated and could result in income statement
charges that could be material to the companys results of operations in future
periods.
shareholder litigation and related proceedings
three actions against the
company and certain of its current and former officers and directors are
pending in the united states district court for the district of minnesota. two
of these actions, which were originally captioned kahn v. the st. paul travelers companies,inc., et al.
(nov.2, 2004) and michael a. bernstein
profit sharing plan v. the st. paul travelers companies,inc., et al.
(nov.10, 2004), are putative class actions brought by certain
shareholders of the company against the company and certain of its current and
former officers and directors. these actions have been consolidated as in re st. paul travelers securities litigation ii,
and a lead plaintiff and lead counsel have been appointed. on july11,
2005, the lead plaintiff filed an amended consolidated complaint. the amended
consolidated complaint alleges violations of federal securities laws in connection
with the companys alleged failure to make disclosure relating to the practice
of paying brokers commissions on a contingent basis, the companys alleged
involvement in a conspiracy to rig bids and the companys allegedly improper
use of finite reinsurance products. on september26, 2005, the company and
the other defendants in in re st. paul travelers securities litigation
ii moved to dismiss the amended consolidated complaint for failure
to state a claim. oral argument on the companys motion to dismiss was
presented on june15, 2006. by order dated september25, 2006, the
court denied the companys motion to dismiss. discovery has commenced. on november3,
2006, the company and the other defendants in in re st.
paul travelers securities litigation ii moved for partial judgment
on the pleadings seeking dismissal of the allegations relating to the allegedly
improper use of finite reinsurance products. that motion remains pending. in the
third action, an alleged beneficiary of the companys 401(k)savings plan
commenced a putative class action against the company and certain of its
current and former officers and directors captioned spiziri v. the st. paul travelers companies,inc., et al.
(dec.28, 2004). the complaint alleges violations of the employee
retirement income security act based on the theory that defendants were
allegedly aware of issues concerning the value of spcs loss reserves yet
failed to protect plan participants from continued investment in company stock. on june1, 2005, the company and
the other defendants in spiziri
moved to dismiss the complaint. on january4, 2006, the parties in spiziri entered into a stipulation of settlement. the
settlement remains subject to court approval.
in addition, two
derivative actions have been brought in the united states district court for
the district of minnesota against all of the companys current directors and
certain of the companys former directors, naming the company as a nominal
defendant: rowe v. fishman, et al.
(oct.22, 2004) and clark v. fishman,
et al. (nov.18, 2004). the derivative actions have been
consolidated for pretrial proceedings as
rowe, et al. v. fishman, et al. and a consolidated derivative
complaint has been filed. the consolidated derivative complaint asserts state
law claims, including breach of fiduciary duty, based on allegations similar to
those alleged in in re st. paul travelers
securities litigation ii and spiziri described above. on march23,
2006, the court dismissed the complaint without prejudice and, on march30,
2006, entered judgment in favor of the company and the other defendants. on june5,
2006, plaintiffs in rowe moved to
alter or amend the judgment for leave to file an amended complaint. the company
and the other defendants opposed that motion. on november1, 2006, the
parties in rowe entered into a stipulation of
settlement whereby plaintiffs released the company and other defendants from
liability in exchange for an agreement by defendants to adopt certain corporate
governance measures for the benefit of the company. the settlement remains
subject to court approval.
the company believes that
the pending lawsuits have no merit and intends to defend vigorously; however,
the company is not able to provide any assurance that the financial impact of
one or more of these proceedings will not be material to the companys results
of operations in a future period. the
company
is obligated to indemnify its officers and directors to the extent provided
under minnesota law. as part of that obligation, the company will advance
officers and directors attorneys fees and other expenses they incur in
defending these lawsuits.
other proceedings
from time to time, the
company is involved in proceedings addressing disputes with its reinsurers
regarding the collection of amounts due under the companys reinsurance
agreements. these proceedings may be initiated by the company or the reinsurers
and may involve the terms of the reinsurance agreements, the coverage of
particular claims, exclusions under the agreements, as well as counterclaims
for rescission of the agreements. one of these disputes is the action described
in the following paragraphs.
the companys gulf
operation brought an action on may22, 2003, as amended on may12,
2004, in the supreme court of new york, county of new york (gulf insurance company v. transatlantic reinsurance
company, et al.), against transatlantic reinsurance company
(transatlantic), xl reinsurance america,inc. (xl), odyssey america
reinsurance corporation (odyssey), employers reinsurance company (employers)
and gerling global reinsurance corporation of america (gerling), to recover
amounts due under reinsurance contracts issued to gulf and related to gulfs february2003
settlement of a coverage dispute under a vehicle residual value protection
insurance policy. the reinsurers have asserted counterclaims seeking rescission
of the vehicle residual value reinsurance contracts issued to gulf and
unspecified damages for breach of contract. separate actions filed by
transatlantic and gerling have been consolidated with the original gulf action
for pre-trial purposes.
on october1, 2003,
gulf entered into a final settlement agreement with employers, and all claims
and counterclaims with respect to employers have been dismissed. on may26,
2004, the court denied gulfs motion to dismiss certain claims asserted by
transatlantic and denied a joint motion by transatlantic, xl and odyssey for
summary judgment against gulf. on december22, 2006, gulf and xl entered
into a final settlement agreement which resolves all claims between gulf and xl
under the reinsurance agreements at issue in the litigation. fact and expert
discovery are complete with respect to the remaining parties:transatlantic,
odyssey and gerling. gulf, transatlantic and gerling have filed motions for
partial summary judgment. the court has not yet set a trial date. gulf denies
the reinsurers allegations, believes that it has a strong legal basis to
collect the amounts due under the reinsurance contracts and intends to
vigorously pursue the actions.
based on the companys
beliefs about its legal positions in its various reinsurance recovery
proceedings, the company does not expect any of these matters will have a
material adverse effect on its results of operations in a future period.
the company is a defendant
in three consolidated lawsuits in the united states district court for the
eastern district of louisiana arising out of disputes with certain
policyholders over whether insurance coverage is available for flood losses
arising from hurricane katrina: chehardy, et al. v. state
farm, et al., c.a. no.06-1672, 06-1673 and 06-1674,
vanderbrook, et al. v. state farm fire&
cas. co., et al. c.a. no.05-6323; and xavier university of louisiana v. travelers property ca. co. of america,
c.a. no.06-516. chehardy and vanderbrook are proposed class actions in which the company
is one of several insurer defendants. xavier is an
individual suit involving a property insurance policy brought by one of the
companys insureds. the losses involved in all of these suits allegedly were
caused by the failure of the new orleans levees. on november27, 2006, the
court issued a ruling in the three consolidated cases denying the motions of
the company and certain other insurers for a summary disposition of the cases. the
courts ruling does not determine that any additional amounts are owed under
any of the companys policies or otherwise reach the merits of the
policyholders claims. the company disagrees with the ruling and, along with
certain other insurers named in the consolidated lawsuits, filed a motion with
the united states court of appeals for the fifth circuit, seeking to have the
court of appeals accept an immediate appeal from the district courts ruling.
on february1, 2007, the fifth circuit accepted the appeal.
as part of ongoing,
industry-wide investigations, the company and its affiliates have received
subpoenas and written requests for information from government agencies and
authorities. the areas of pending inquiry addressed to the company include its
relationship with brokers and agents, and the companys involvement with non-traditional
insurance and reinsurance products. the company or its affiliates have
received subpoenas or requests for information, in each case with respect to
one or both of the areas described above, from: (i)state of california
office of the attorney general; (ii)state of california department of
insurance; (iii)licensing and market conduct compliance division,
financial services commission of ontario, canada; (iv)state of
connecticut insurance department; (v)state of connecticut office of the
attorney general; (vi)state of delaware department of insurance; (vii)state
of florida department of financial services; (viii)state of florida
office of insurance regulation; (ix)state of florida department of legal
affairs office of the attorney general; (x)state of georgia office of the
commissioner of insurance; (xi) state of hawaii office of the attorney general;
(xii)state of illinois office of the attorney general; (xiii) state of
illinois department of financial and professional regulation; (xiv) state of
iowa insurance division; (xv) state of maryland office of the attorney general;
(xvi) state of maryland insurance administration; (xvii) commonwealth of
massachusetts office of the attorney general; (xviii) state of minnesota
department of commerce; (xix) state of minnesota office of the attorney
general; (xx) state of new hampshire insurance department; (xxi) state of new
york office of the attorney general; (xxii) state of new york insurance
department; (xxiii) state of north carolina department of insurance; (xxiv)
state of ohio office of the attorney general; (xxv) state of ohio department of
insurance; (xxvi) state of oregon department of justice; (xxvii) commonwealth
of pennsylvania office of the attorney general; (xxviii) state of texas office
of the attorney general; (xxvix) state of texas department of insurance; (xxx)
commonwealth of virginia office of the attorney general; (xxxi) state of
washington office of the insurance commissioner; (xxxii) state of west virginia
office of attorney general; (xxxiii) the united states attorney for the
southern district of new york; (xxxiv) the united states internal revenue
service, department of the treasury; and (xxxv) the united states securities
and exchange commission. the company and its affiliates may receive additional
subpoenas and requests for information with respect to the areas described
above from other agencies or authorities.
the company is cooperating
with these subpoenas and requests for information. in addition, outside
counsel, with the oversight of the companys board of directors, has been
conducting an internal review of certain of the companys business practices. this
review initially focused on the companys relationship with brokers and was
commenced after the announcement of litigation brought by the new york attorney
generals office against a major broker.
the internal review was
expanded to address the various requests for information described above and to
verify whether the companys business practices in these areas have been
appropriate. the companys review has been extensive, involving the examination
of e-mails and underwriting files, as well as interviews of current and former
employees. the company also continues to receive and respond to additional
requests for information and will expand its review accordingly.
to date, the company has
found only a few instances of conduct that were inconsistent with the companys
employee code of conduct. the company has responded, and will continue to
respond, appropriately to any such conduct.
the companys internal
review with respect to finite reinsurance considered finite products the
company both purchased and sold. the company has completed its review with
respect to the identified finite products purchased and sold, and has concluded
that no adjustment to previously issued financial statements is required.
except as settled as
previously disclosed, the industry-wide investigations described above are
ongoing, as are the companys efforts to cooperate with the authorities, and
the various authorities could ask that additional work be performed or reach
conclusions different from the companys. accordingly, it would be premature to
reach any conclusions as to the likely outcome of these matters.
four putative class action
lawsuits are pending against a number of insurance brokers and insurers,
including the company and/or certain of its affiliates, by plaintiffs who
allegedly purchased insurance products through one or more of the defendant
brokers. plaintiffs allege that various insurance brokers conspired with each
other and with various insurers, including the company and/or certain of its
affiliates, to artificially inflate premiums, allocate brokerage customers and
rig bids for insurance products offered to those customers. the complaints are
captioned:redwood oil company v. marsh&
mclennan companies,inc., et
al. (n.d. ill. jan.21, 2005),
boros v. marsh& mclennan companies,inc., et al.
(n.d. cal. feb.4, 2005), mulcahy v.
arthur j. gallagher& co., et al. (d.n.j. feb.23,
2005) and golden gate bridge, highway, and
transportation district v. marsh& mclennan companies,inc., et
al. (d.n.j. feb.23, 2005). to the extent they were not
originally filed there, the federal class actions were transferred by the
judicial panel on multidistrict litigation to the united states district court
for the district of new jersey and have been consolidated with other class
actions under the caption in re insurance
brokerage antitrust litigation, a multidistrict litigation
proceeding in that district. on august1, 2005, various plaintiffs,
including the four named plaintiffs in the above-referenced class actions,
filed an amended consolidated class action complaint naming various brokers and
insurers, including the company and certain of its affiliates, on behalf of a
putative nationwide class of policyholders. the complaint includes causes of
action under the sherman act, the racketeer influenced and corrupt
organizations act (rico), state common law and the laws of the various states
prohibiting antitrust violations. plaintiffs seek monetary damages, including
punitive damages and trebled damages, permanent injunctive relief, restitution,
including disgorgement of profits, interest and costs, including attorneys
fees. on november29, 2005, all defendants moved to dismiss the complaint
for failure to state a claim. oral arguments on the defendants motion to
dismiss were heard on july26, 2006. on october3, 2006, the court
ruled that the complaint failed to plead actionable claims under the sherman
act or rico, provided plaintiffs an opportunity to replead those claims and
reserved decision with respect to remaining state law claims. on november30,
2006, defendants renewed their motions to dismiss. on february13, 2006,
the named plaintiffs moved to certify a nationwide class consisting of all
persons who between august26, 1994 and the date of class certification
engaged the services of a broker defendant (or related entity) in connection
with the procurement or renewal of insurance and who entered into or renewed a
contract of insurance with one or more of the insurer defendants, including the
company. the renewed motion to dismiss and class certification motion remain
pending. also, additional individual actions have been brought in state and
federal courts against the company involving allegations similar to those in in re insurance brokerage antitrust litigation and further
actions may be brought. the company believes that all of these lawsuits have no
merit and intends to defend vigorously.
in addition to those
described above, the company is involved in numerous lawsuits, not involving
asbestos and environmental claims, arising mostly in the ordinary course of
business operations either as a liability insurer defending third-party claims
brought against policyholders, or as an insurer defending claims brought
against it relating to coverage or the companys business practices. while the
ultimate resolution of these legal proceedings could be material to the companys
results of operations in a future period, in the opinion of the companys
management, none would likely have a material adverse effect on the companys
financial condition or liquidity.
on july23, 2004, the
company announced that it was seeking guidance from the staff of the division
of corporation finance of the sec with respect to the appropriate purchase
accounting treatment for certain second quarter 2004 adjustments totaling $1.63
billion ($1.07 billion after-tax). the company recorded these adjustments as
charges in its consolidated statement of income in the second quarter of 2004.
through an informal comment process, the staff of the division of corporation
finance has subsequently asked for further information, which the company has
provided. specifically, the staff has asked for information concerning the
companys adjustments to certain of spcs insurance reserves and reserves for
reinsurance recoverables and premiums due from policyholders, and how those
adjustments may relate to spcs reserves for periods prior to the merger of spc
and tpc. after reviewing the staffs
questions
and comments, the company continues to believe that its accounting treatment
for these adjustments is appropriate. if, however, the staff disagrees, some or
all of the adjustments being discussed may not be recorded as charges in the
companys consolidated statement of income, thereby increasing net income for
the second quarter and full year 2004 and increasing shareholders equity at december31,
2006, 2005 and 2004, in each case by the approximate after-tax amount of the
change. the effect on tangible shareholders equity (adjusted for the effects
of deferred taxes associated with goodwill and intangible assets) at december31,
2006, 2005 and 2004 would not be material. increases to goodwill and deferred
tax liabilities would be reflected on the companys balance sheet as of april1,
2004, either due to purchase accounting or adjustment of spcs reserves prior
to the merger of spc and tpc. on may3, 2006, the company received a
letter from the division of enforcement of the sec (the division) advising
the company that it is conducting an inquiry relating to the second quarter
2004 adjustments and the april1, 2004 merger of spc and tpc. the company
is cooperating with the divisions requests for information.
item4. submission
of matters to a vote of security holders
none.
executive officers of the registrant
information about the
companys executive officers is incorporated by reference from partiii,
item10 of this report.
partii
item5. market
for registrants common equity, related shareholder matters and issuer
purchases of equity securities
the
companys common stock is traded on the new york stock exchange, where it is
assigned the symbol sta. the number of holders of record, including
individual owners, of the companys common stock was 89,234 as of february15,
2007. this is not the actual number of beneficial owners of the companys
common stock, as shares are held in street name by brokers and others on
behalf of individual owners. the following table sets forth the amount of cash
dividends declared per share and the high and low closing sales prices of the
companys common stock for each quarter during the last two fiscal years.
high
low
cash
dividend
declared
first quarter
$
47.65
$
40.75
$
0.23
second quarter
45.86
41.02
0.26
third quarter
47.39
42.62
0.26
fourth quarter
54.23
46.43
0.26
first quarter
$
39.40
$
35.89
$
0.22
second quarter
39.87
33.71
0.23
third quarter
45.14
39.60
0.23
fourth quarter
46.70
41.37
0.23
the company paid cash
dividends per share of $1.01 in 2006 and $0.91 in 2005. future dividend
decisions will be based on and affected by a number of factors, including the
operating results and financial requirements of the company and the impact of
dividend restrictions. for information on dividends, including dividend
restrictions included in certain long-term loan or credit agreements of the company
and its subsidiaries, as well as restrictions on the ability of certain of the
companys subsidiaries to transfer funds to the company in the form of cash
dividends or otherwise, see item 7managements discussion and analysis of
financial condition and results of operationsliquidity and capital resources.
dividends will be paid by the company only if declared by its board of
directors out of funds legally available, and subject to any other restrictions
that may be applicable to the company.
shareholder return
performance graph
the following graph shows
a five-year comparison of the cumulative total return for the companys common
stock and the common stock of companies included in the s&p 500 index and
the s&p property& casualty index, which the company believes is
the most appropriate comparative index.
(1) assumes $100 invested in
common shares of the st. paul companies,inc. on december31, 2001.
the performance reflected is that of the st. paul companies,inc. only
until the date of the merger (april1, 2004), and is that of the st. paul
travelers companies,inc. thereafter.
(2) companies in the s&p
property-casualty index as of december31, 2006 were the following: the
st.paul travelers companies,inc., aceltd., ambac financial
group,inc., safeco corporation, the chubb corporation, cincinnati
financial corporation, progressive corporation, allstate corporation, mbia,inc.
and xl capital,ltd.
returns of each of
the companies included in this index have been weighted according to their
respective market capitalizations.
issuer purchases of
equity securities
the
table below sets forth information regarding repurchases by the company of its
common stock during the periods indicated.
periodbeginning
periodending
totalnumberof
shares
purchased
averagepricepaid
pershare
totalnumberof
sharespurchased
aspartof
publiclyannounced
plansorprograms
maximum
dollarvalueof
sharesthatmay
yetbepurchased
underthe
plansorprograms
oct.1, 2006
oct.31, 2006
1,192,313
$
50.55
987,400
$
1,578,980,445
nov.1,2006
nov.30, 2006
10,703,006
51.93
10,358,536
1,040,954,588
dec.1, 2006
dec.31, 2006
3,135,134
52.73
3,073,625
878,945,168
total
15,030,453
$
51.99
14,419,561
$
878,945,168
the company repurchased 610,892 shares that were not
part of the publicly announced share repurchase program, representing shares
repurchased to cover payroll withholding taxes in connection with the vesting
of restricted stock awards and exercises of stock options, and shares used to
cover the exercise price of certain stock options that were exercised. the
companys $2 billion share repurchase program (the program), which has no
expiration date, was approved and announced by the companys board of directors
on may2, 2006. during 2006, the company repurchased a total of 22.8
million shares for a total cost of $1.12 billion under the program, and had $879
million of remaining capacity under the program at december31, 2006. in january2007,
the companys board of directors authorized a $3 billion increase to the
program.
item6. selected
financial data
all
data in the following table for 2002 and 2003 represent historical data for
tpc. for accounting purposes, the merger of spc and tpc was accounted for as a
reverse acquisition with tpc treated as the accounting acquirer. accordingly,
this transaction was accounted for as a purchase business combination, using
tpcs historical financial information and applying fair value estimates to the
acquired assets, liabilities and commitments of spc as of april1, 2004.
historical results are not necessarily indicative of results to be expected in
the future.
atandfortheyearendeddecember31,(1)
(inmillions,exceptpershareamounts)
total revenues
$
25,090
$
24,365
$
22,544
$
15,139
$
14,270
income from continuing operations before cumulative
effectof change in accounting principles
$
4,208
$
2,061
$
$
1,696
$
cumulative effect
of change in accounting principles, net oftax(2)
(243
)
income (loss) from
discontinued operations
(439
)
net income (loss)
$
4,208
$
1,622
$
$
1,696
$
(27
)
total investments
$
72,268
$
68,287
$
64,368
$
38,653
$
38,425
total assets
113,761
113,187
111,246
64,872
64,138
claims and claim
adjustment expense reserves
59,288
61,090
59,070
34,573
33,736
total debt
5,760
5,850
6,313
2,675
2,544
total liabilities
88,626
90,884
90,045
52,885
53,100
company-obligated
mandatorily redeemable securities of subsidiary trusts holding solely junior
subordinated debt securities of tighi
total
shareholders equity
25,135
22,303
21,201
11,987
10,137
basic earnings (loss) per
share:(3)
income from
continuing operations before cumulative effectof change in accounting
principles
$
6.12
$
3.04
$
1.42
$
3.91
$
0.52
cumulative effect
of change in accounting principles, net oftax
(0.59
)
income (loss) from
discontinued operations(4)
(0.65
)
0.14
net income (loss)
6.12
2.39
1.56
3.91
(0.07
)
diluted
earnings (loss) per share:(3)
income from
continuing operations before cumulative effectof change in accounting
principles
$
5.91
$
2.95
$
1.40
$
3.80
$
0.52
cumulative effect
of change in accounting principles, net oftax
(0.59
)
income (loss) from
discontinued operations(4)
(0.62
)
0.13
net income (loss)
5.91
2.33
1.53
3.80
(0.07
)
year-end common
shares outstanding(3)(5)
678.3
693.4
670.3
435.8
435.1
per common share
data:
cash
dividends(3)(6)
$
1.01
$
0.91
$
1.16
$
0.65
$
12.07
book value(3)
$
36.86
$
31.94
$
31.35
$
27.51
$
23.30
(1) on april1, 2004, travelers property casualty
corp. (tpc) merged with a subsidiary of the st. paul companies,inc.
(spc), as a result of which tpc became a wholly-owned subsidiary of spc and spc
changed its name to the st. paul travelers companies,inc.
(2) cumulative effect of change in accounting principles,
net of tax consisted of a loss of $243 million as a result of a change in
accounting for goodwill and other intangible assets.
(3) earnings per share, year-end common shares outstanding,
cash dividends per share and book value per share were restated for the years
prior to 2004 to reflect the impact of the merger with spc.
(4) in august2005, the company completed its
divestiture of nuveen investments,inc., its asset management subsidiary
acquired in the merger. accordingly, the companys share of nuveen investments
results prior to divestiture was classified as discontinued operations, along
with the net after-tax loss on disposal. prior period results were reclassified
to be consistent with the 2005 presentation.
(5) in march2002, tpc issued common stock through its
initial public offering (ipo). tpc issued 231 million shares of its class a
common stock, representing approximately 23% of tpcs common equity. after the
ipo, citigroup inc. beneficially owned all of the 500 million shares of tpcs
outstanding class b common stock, each share of which was entitled to seven
votes, and 269 million shares of tpcs class a common stock, each share of
which was entitled to one vote, representing at the time 94% of the combined
voting power of all classes of tpcs voting securities and 77% of the equity
interest in tpc. on august20, 2002, citigroup made a tax-free
distribution to its stockholders (the citigroup distribution), of a portion of
its ownership interest in tpc, which, together with the shares issued in the
ipo, represented more than 90% of tpcs common equity and more than 90% of the
combined voting power of tpcs outstanding voting securities. citigroup
received a private letter ruling from the internal revenue service that the
citigroup distribution was tax-free to citigroup, its stockholders and tpc. as
part of the ruling process, citigroup agreed to vote the shares it continued to
hold of tpc following the citigroup distribution pro rata with the shares held
by the public and to divest the remaining shares it holds within five years
following the citigroup distribution. after the merger, this undertaking also
applied to shares of company common stock. at december31, 2006, citigroup
held for its own account none of the companys outstanding common stock.
(6) dividends per common share reflect the recapitalization
effected as part of tpcs corporate reorganization in 2002. during 2002, tpc
paid dividends of $5.10 billion in the form of a note payable and $158 million
in cash to citigroup, its then sole shareholder.
item7. managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations
the following is a
discussion and analysis of the financial condition and results of operations of
the st. paul travelers companies,inc. (together with its subsidiaries,
the company). on april1, 2004, travelers property casualty corp. (tpc)
merged with a subsidiary of the st. paul companies,inc. (spc), as a
result of which tpc became a wholly-owned subsidiary of spc, and spc changed
its name to the st. paul travelers,inc. for accounting purposes, this
transaction was accounted for as a reverse acquisition with tpc treated as the
accounting acquirer. accordingly, this transaction was accounted for as a
purchase business combination, using tpc historical financial information and
applying fair value estimates to the acquired assets, liabilities, and
commitments of spc as of april1, 2004. beginning on april1, 2004,
the results of operations and financial condition of spc were consolidated with
tpcs. accordingly, all financial information presented herein for the twelve
months ended december31, 2006 and 2005 reflects the consolidated accounts
of spc and tpc. the financial information presented herein for the twelve
months ended december31, 2004 reflects only the accounts of tpc for the
three months ended march31, 2004 and the consolidated accounts of spc and
tpc for the nine months ended december31, 2004.
executive summary
2006 consolidated results of operations
income
from continuing operations and net income of $4.21 billion, or $6.12 per share
basic and $5.91 diluted
net
favorable prior year reserve development of $394 million pretax ($255 million
after-tax)
net
earned premiums of $20.76 billion
gaap
combined ratio of 88.1%
pretax net investment income
of $3.52 billion ($2.71 billion after-tax)
2006 consolidated
financial condition
total
assets of $113.76 billion, up $574 million from december31, 2005
total
investments of $72.27 billion, up $3.98 billion from december31, 2005;
fixed maturities and short-term securities comprise 94% of total investments
total
debt of $5.76 billion, down $90 million from december31, 2005
repurchased
22.8 million common shares for total cost of $1.12 billion under share
repurchase program
shareholders equity of
$25.14 billion, up $2.83 billion from december31, 2005; book value per
common share of $36.86, up $4.92 from december31, 2005
consolidated
overview
the company provides a
wide range of property and casualty insurance products and services to businesses,
government units, associations and individuals, primarily in the united states
and in selected international markets.
consolidated
results of operations
fortheyearendeddecember31,
revenues
premiums
$
20,760
$
20,341
$
19,038
net investment
income
3,517
3,165
2,663
fee income
net realized
investment gains (losses)
(39
)
other revenues
total revenues
25,090
24,365
22,544
claims and expenses
claims and claim
adjustment expenses
12,244
14,927
15,439
amortization of
deferred acquisition costs
3,339
3,252
2,978
general and
administrative expenses
3,458
3,229
2,945
interest expense
total claims and expenses
19,365
21,694
21,598
income from continuing operations before income
taxes and minority interest
5,725
2,671
income tax
expense
1,517
minority
interest, net of tax
income from continuing operations
4,208
2,061
discontinued operations:
operating income (loss), net of taxes
(663
)
gain on disposal, net of taxes
income (loss) from discontinued operations
(439
)
net income
$
4,208
$
1,622
$
income from continuing operations
per share
basic
$
6.12
$
3.04
$
1.42
diluted(1)
$
5.91
$
2.95
$
1.40
gaap combined ratio
loss and loss adjustment expense ratio
57.5
%
71.9
%
79.4
%
underwriting expense ratio
30.6
29.4
28.3
gaap
combined ratio
88.1
%
101.3
%
107.7
%
(1) the
weighted average number of common shares used in the diluted earnings per share
calculation for the year ended december31, 2004 excluded the potentially
dilutive effect of the companys convertible junior subordinated notes because
their effect was anti-dilutive.
the companys discussions
related to all items, other than net income, income from continuing operations,
income (loss) from discontinued operations, and segment operating income
(loss), are presented on a pretax basis, unless otherwise noted. throughout the
following discussion, the company references the impact of the merger in the
context of a comparison between 2005 and 2004, referring to the fact that the
companys 2005 results reflected a full year of combined post-merger
operations, whereas the companys 2004 results reflected combined post-merger
operations for the nine months subsequent to the april1, 2004 merger
date, plus the results of tpc only for the three months ended march31,
2004.
overview
income from continuing
operations in 2006 totaled $4.21 billion, or $5.91 per share diluted, compared
with 2005 income from continuing operations of $2.06 billion, or $2.95 per
share diluted. the $2.15 billion increase in 2006 operating results reflected a
significant decline in catastrophe losses, net favorable prior
year
reserve development, strong growth in investment income and higher business
volume. these factors were partially offset by an increase in general and
administrative expenses and a decline in fee income. catastrophe losses in 2006
totaled $103 million, primarily resulting from several wind, rain, hail and
snow storms in the united states, whereas results in 2005 included $2.19
billion of catastrophe costs, primarily resulting from hurricanes katrina, rita
and wilma. net favorable prior year reserve development of $394million in
2006 primarily resulted from better than expected personal auto bodily injury
loss experience and a decline in the frequency of non-catastrophe related
losses in the homeowners and other line of business in the personal insurance
segment, favorable development on 2005 catastrophe losses in personal insurance
and continued improvement in liability and property lines of business in the
business insurance segment. this favorable development was partially offset by
unfavorable prior year reserve development primarily related to increases in
reserves for asbestos, environmental and certain assumed reinsurance business,
all in the business insurance segment. net unfavorable prior year reserve
development in 2005 of $325 million was driven by a charge to strengthen
asbestos reserves, which was partially offset by other non-asbestos related net
favorable prior year reserve development in all three business segments.
income from continuing
operations in 2005 totaled $2.06 billion, or $2.95 per share diluted, compared
with income from continuing operations of $867 million, or $1.40 per share
diluted, in 2004. the increase in income in 2005 reflected the impact of the
merger, improved non-catastrophe related current year loss experience in the
companys three reportable business segments, a decline in net unfavorable
prior year reserve development and strong growth in net investment income. these
factors more than offset a significant increase in the cost of catastrophes,
which totaled $2.19 billion in 2005, compared with $772million in 2004. the
catastrophe losses in 2004 were primarily the result of four hurricanes that
struck the southeastern united states in the third quarter. net unfavorable
prior year reserve development in 2005 totaled $325 million, compared with net
unfavorable prior year reserve development of $2.39 billion in 2004. the net unfavorable prior year reserve development in 2004
was concentrated in the business insurance and financial, professional&
international insurance segments. net unfavorable reserve development in the
business insurance and financial, professional& international
insurance segments in 2004 more than offset additional income resulting from
the merger and strong operating income generated by the companys personal
insurance segment.
in 2005, the company sold
its equity interest in nuveen investments, which constituted its asset
management segment. the company recorded a net loss from discontinued operations
of $439 million, consisting primarily of $710 million of tax expense which
resulted from the difference between the tax basis and the gaap carrying value
of the companys investment in nuveen investments, partially offset by the $224
million after-tax gain on the divestiture and the companys share of nuveen
investments net income for 2005. income from discontinued operations of $88
million in 2004 represented the companys share of nuveen investments net
income for the year.
revenues
earned premiums
earned premiums in 2006
totaled $20.76 billion, an increase of $419 million, or 2%, over the 2005 total
of $20.34 billion. earned premiums in 2006 were negatively impacted by an
increase in property catastrophe reinsurance costs. earned premiums in 2005
were reduced by $121 million of reinstatement premiums, which represent
additional premiums payable to reinsurers to maintain coverage limits for
certain excess-of-loss reinsurance treaties. in the personal insurance segment,
earned premium growth of 9% in 2006 reflected strong new business volume and
continued renewal price increases. in the business insurance segment, earned
premiums in 2006 declined 2% from the comparable 2005 total, primarily
reflecting the impact of business in runoff and the sale of the personal
catastrophe risk operation in november2005. earned premiums in the
financial, professional& international insurance segment in
increased 4% over 2005, primarily reflecting growth in bond&
financial products and the absence of catastrophe-related reinstatement
premiums.
the $1.30 billion increase
in earned premiums in 2005 over 2004 primarily reflected the impact of the
merger, which was partially offset by a significant decline in earned premiums
in the business insurance segments runoff operations and a decline in certain
of business insurances ongoing operations due to a lower level of net written
premium volume in the last half of 2004 and first half of 2005. earned premiums
in 2005 were reduced by the $121 million of reinstatement premiums related to
catastrophe losses. earned premiums in 2004 were reduced by $76 million of
reinstatement premiums primarily related to reserve charges recorded in the
surety operation. partially offsetting these factors were the impacts of new
business growth and increased retention in many of the companys insurance
operations in 2005.
net investment income
the
following table sets forth information regarding the companys investments.
(fortheyearendeddecember31,inmillions)
average
investments(a)
$
71,252
$
66,695
$
55,139
pretax net
investment income
3,517
3,165
2,663
after-tax net
investment income
2,712
2,438
2,020
average pretax
yield(b)
4.9
%
4.7
%
4.8
%
average after-tax yield(b)
3.8
%
3.7
%
3.7
%
(a) adjusted
for the impact of unrealized investment gains and losses, receivables for
investment sales and payables on investment purchases. reduced for payables for
securities lending in 2004. (there were no such payables at december31,
2006 or 2005).
(b) excluding
net realized and unrealized investment gains and losses.
net investment income
totaled $3.52 billion in 2006, an increase of $352 million, or 11%, over 2005
net investment income of $3.17 billion. the increase in 2006 was primarily the
result of higher yields on short-term and long-term taxable securities,
continued growth in the companys fixed maturity portfolio resulting from
strong cash flows from operating activities and a decline in investment expenses.
also contributing to investment income growth in 2006 was the full-year impact
of investment returns from the investment of $2.40 billion in proceeds from the
divestiture of the companys equity interest in nuveen investments during 2005.
the companys real estate joint venture investments, which are included in
other investments, also produced strong levels of net investment income in 2006.
the amortized cost of the fixed maturity portfolio at december31, 2006
totaled $62.24 billion, $3.63 billion higher than year-end 2005. the average
pretax investment yield was 4.9% in 2006 compared with 4.7% in 2005. the
increase primarily reflected higher yields on taxable investments purchased in
2006 and the strong returns generated by the real estate joint venture
investments.
net investment income of
$3.17 billion in 2005 grew $502 million, or 19%, over 2004, reflecting the
impact of the merger, as well as an increase in invested assets over the prior
twelve months, higher short-term interest rates and a decline in
investment expenses. the increase in invested assets in 2005 was driven by
strong cash flows from operating activities and the investment of the $2.40
billion in proceeds from the divestiture of the companys equity interest in
nuveen investments. the average pretax investment yield in 2005 of 4.7%
declined slightly from 4.8% in 2004, due to the maturity of higher yielding
bonds and a higher proportion of tax-exempt investments. net investment income
in 2004 included $111million from the initial public offering of one
investment.
the company allocates
invested assets and the related net investment income to its reportable
business segments. pretax net investment income is allocated based upon an
investable funds concept, which takes into account liabilities (net of
non-invested assets) and appropriate capital considerations for
each
segment. the investment yield for investable funds reflects the duration of the
loss reserves future cash flows, the interest rate environment at the time the
losses were incurred and a+ rated corporate debt instrument yields. the
investment yield for capital reflects the average yield on the total investment
portfolio. it is the application of the yields to the segments investable
funds and capital that determines the respective business segments share of
actual net investment income.
fee income
the national accounts
market in the business insurance segment is the primary source of the companys
fee-based business. the declines in fee income in 2006 and 2005 compared with
the respective prior years is described in the business insurance segment
discussion that follows.
net realized investment gains (losses)
net pretax realized
investment gains in 2006 totaled $11 million, compared with net pretax realized
investment gains of $17 million in 2005. the 2006 total included $49 million of
net realized investment gains (net of impairment losses of $33 million)
generated by the venture capital portfolio and $30 million of net realized
investment gains related to u.s. treasury futures contracts (which require a
daily mark-to-market settlement and are used to shorten the duration of the
companys fixed maturity investment portfolio). these gains were substantially
offset by $33 million of net realized investment losses from the fixed maturity
portfolio (including $7 million of impairment losses) and $22 million of net
realized investment losses related to the companys holdings of stock purchase
warrants of platinum underwriters holdings, ltd., a publicly-held company. in
addition, the company incurred net realized losses of $11 million related to
the divestiture of two small subsidiaries.
net pretax realized
investment gains in 2005 were primarily generated from sales of venture capital
investments and equity securities. in addition, the company realized a pretax
gain of $21 million from the sale of its personal catastrophe risk operation
and $13 million of pretax net gains related to u.s. treasury futures contracts.
net realized investment gains in 2005 were reduced by $109 million of
impairment losses, which were concentrated in the venture capital portfolio as
described in more detail later in this discussion. the companys net pretax
realized investment losses of $39 million in 2004 included impairment charges
totaling $80 million. net pretax realized investment gains (losses) in 2004
also included net losses of $44million related to u.s. treasury futures
contracts.
further information
regarding the nature of impairment charges in each year is included in the investment
portfolio management section later in this discussion.
other revenues
other revenues in all
periods presented primarily consist of premium installment charges. in
addition, other revenues in 2006 included a $42 million gain on the redemption
of the companys $593 million, 7.60% subordinated debentures.
written premiums
consolidated
gross and net written premiums were as follows:
grosswrittenpremiums
(fortheyearendeddecember31,inmillions)
business insurance
$
13,047
$
13,453
$
13,034
financial,
professional& international insurance
3,981
3,809
3,113
personal insurance
7,011
6,474
6,111
total
$
24,039
$
23,736
$
22,258
netwrittenpremiums
(fortheyearendeddecember31,inmillions)
business insurance
$
11,046
$
10,999
$
10,374
financial,
professional& international insurance
3,393
3,159
2,708
personal insurance
6,711
6,228
5,929
total
$
21,150
$
20,386
$
19,011
gross and net written
premiums in 2006 increased 1% and 4%, respectively, over 2005. the disparity
between gross and net written premium growth rates in 2006 was concentrated in
the business insurance segment and was primarily due to a change in the
structure of reinsurance coverage in the companys discover re subsidiary that
resulted in a decline in ceded premiums. net written premium volume in 2006 was
negatively impacted by a higher level of premiums ceded for the cost of
property catastrophe reinsurance, whereas net written premiums in 2005 were
reduced by $121 million of catastrophe-related reinstatement premiums.
in business insurance, net
written premium growth in 2006 was driven by strong increases in target risk
underwriting, due to significant renewal price increases for southeastern u.s.
catastrophe-prone exposures, and in industry-focused underwriting, due to growth
in several industry sectors served by this market. that growth was largely
offset by a reduction in premium volume for operations in runoff, primarilty
due to the sale of the personal catastrophe risk operation in the fourth
quarter of 2005. business retention rates remained strong throughout the
business insurance segment in 2006, and new business volume increased. in
financial, professional& international insurance, written premium
growth in 2006 reflected strong business volume throughout the segment, and the
absence of catastrophe-related reinstatement premiums. net written premium
growth in the personal insurance segment in 2006 reflected growth in new
business volume, renewal price increases and continued strong business
retention rates, partially offset by the estimated impact of transitioning to
six-month policy terms in the second half of the year for a large portion of
the companys multivariate pricing automobile product, and an increase in ceded
premiums for catastrophe reinsurance.
gross and net written
premiums in 2005 both increased 7% over 2004, primarily reflecting the impact
of the merger. however, gross and net written premium volumes in 2005 were down
when compared to 2004 on a pro forma combined basis. the declines were
concentrated in the business insurance segment, reflecting the planned
non-renewal of business in runoff and reduced premium volume in certain ongoing
operations due to competitive market conditions. in addition, premium volume in
the business insurance segments construction operation was lower than in 2004
on a pro forma basis due to the now-completed process of aligning the
underwriting profile of the two predecessor companies. net written premiums in
2005 were reduced by $121 million of catastrophe-related reinstatement
premiums, whereas 2004 net written premium volume was reduced by $76 million of
reinstatement premiums primarily related to reserving actions in the financial,
professional& international insurance segment. premium volume in the
personal insurance segment increased over 2004, driven by continued renewal
price increases and growth in policies in force in the homeowners line of
business. during 2005, the company experienced strong business retention rates
on a company-wide basis, as the company focused on retaining its existing book
of well-priced, profitable business. new business levels in several of the
companys insurance operations also increased over 2004. rate increases,
however, were generally lower in 2005 compared with 2004, reflecting increased
competition and more aggressive pricing in the marketplace. rates for certain
products in selected markets declined from 2004 levels.
in the first quarter of
2005, the company implemented changes in the timing and structure of
reinsurance purchased in the business insurance and financial, professional&
international insurance segments. the changes in structure resulted in an
increase in ceded premiums in 2005 when compared with 2004. the company also
made a modest adjustment to 2004 ceded written premiums to report at inception
all ceded written premiums for reinsurance agreements that have minimum amounts
required to be ceded. previously, ceded written premiums for certain of these
agreements were reported over the life of the
contracts.
this adjustment affected only the statistical disclosure of net written
premiums on a quarter-by-quarter basis; it did not affect net written
premium amounts over the lives of the respective agreements, nor did it impact
gross written premiums, earned premiums, operating results or capital. the
adjustment was made to conform the statistical measurement of productionnet
written premiumsacross the companys businesses.
claims and expenses
claims and claim adjustment expenses
claims and claim
adjustment expenses totaled $12.24 billion in 2006, $2.68 billion less than the
2005 total of $14.93 billion. the 2006 total included $103 million of
catastrophe losses and $394 million of net favorable prior year reserve
development, whereas the 2005 total included $2.03 billion of catastrophe
losses and $325 million of net unfavorable prior year reserve development. catastrophe
losses in 2005 primarily resulted from hurricanes katrina, rita and wilma. net
favorable prior year reserve development in 2006 was concentrated in the
personal insurance segment, primarily reflecting better than expected loss
experience in the auto bodily injury and non-catastrophe related homeowners and
other lines of business, and a reduction in loss estimates for the 2005
hurricanes. the business insurance segment also experienced net favorable prior
year loss experience in its ongoing operations in 2006, primarily in the
commercial multi-peril, general liability, property and commercial automobile
lines of business. that favorable development was partially offset by increases
to asbestos and environmental reserves, which are discussed in more detail in
the asbestos claims and litigation and environmental claims and litigation
sections herein. there was also unfavorable prior year reserve development in
runoff assumed reinsurance business. in 2005, the net unfavorable prior year
reserve development was concentrated in the business insurance segment and was
primarily driven by an increase to asbestos reserves, which was partially
offset by other, non-asbestos related net favorable prior year reserve
development in all three business segments.
claims and claim
adjustment expenses of $14.93 billion in 2005 were $512 million lower than the
2004 total of $15.44 billion. the 2005 total included $2.03 billion of
catastrophe losses, compared with $761 million of such losses in 2004. the cost
of catastrophes is discussed in more detail in the following narrative. the
2005 total also included $325 million of net unfavorable prior year reserve
development, as described above, compared with $2.39 billion of net unfavorable
prior year reserve development in 2004. claims and claim adjustment expenses in
2005 also reflected improvement in current accident year non-catastrophe
related loss experience as compared with 2004.
the 2004 net unfavorable prior year reserve
development of $2.39 billion included a $928 million charge to increase
asbestos reserves and a $290 million charge to increase environmental reserves.
in addition, the 2004 total included charges to increase
the acquired net construction and surety reserves by $500 million and $300
million, respectively, and a charge of $252 million related to the financial
condition of a specific construction contractor. the following discussion
provides more information regarding the net unfavorable prior year loss
development related to these three items in 2004, as well as other reserving
actions.
upon having access to each companys detailed
policyholder information, including underwriting, claim, and actuarial files on
april1, 2004, in connection with the closing of the merger, the company
was able to begin the detailed process of developing a uniform and consistent
approach to estimating the combined companys loss reserves. as part of that
process, a team of actuaries representing the historical actuarial
perspectives, judgments and methods applied by each legacy company, discussed
their views, methodologies, and analysis of available data.
in addition to the discussion in the critical accounting estimates section of
this report, other items specifically considered in the process of developing a
uniform and consistent approach to estimating the combined companys loss
reserves after the merger included interpreting the actuarial and claim data in
a
uniform manner and determining
an appropriate level of data segmentation for estimation purposes. this type of
analysis involves a high degree of judgment and can, and often does, lead to
reserve estimates that differ materially from those of prior periods,
particularly in low frequency, high severity and complex exposures. in
addition, since the reserving process also considers the expectations of future
outcomes, the actuaries involved had to analyze their differing views on key
assumptions, such as predicting inflation, estimating claim development
patterns and determining expectations related to judicial rulings and
interpretations, among others. this informed judgment is brought into the
process by individuals such as actuaries, underwriters, claim adjusters, and
company management. ultimately, this process required an analysis of the
varying actuarial judgments and forward-looking assessments. the result was
similar to a single, ongoing insurance enterprise obtaining more information in
a reporting period than it had previously and identifying a change in estimate
in its insurance reserves in that period. accordingly, the company recorded a
$500 million and $300 million charge for construction and surety, respectively,
in the second quarter of 2004.
construction
reserves. beginning on april1, 2004, upon
the completion of the merger, personnel from the predecessor companies were
able to share detailed policyholder information, claim files and actuarial data
related to the acquired construction reserves. this enabled an analysis to be
performed in the second quarter of the acquired construction reserves using
tpcs long-established practices that includes evaluating exposures by type of
claim (e.g. construction defect, construction wrap-up, other), by type of
coverage (e.g. guaranteed cost, loss responsive, other) and by detailed line of
business (general liability, commercial auto, etc.), among others. for general
liability exposures, which include construction defect and construction
wrap-up, interpretation of underlying trends (both present and future) and the
related reserve estimation process is highly judgmental due to the low
frequency/high severity and complex nature of these exposures. in particular,
for construction defect, there is a high degree of uncertainty relating to
whether coverage exists, when losses occur, the size of each loss, expectations
for future interpretive rulings concerning contract provisions and the extent
to which the assertion of these claims will expand geographically. as a result,
material variations can and do occur among actuarial reserve estimates for
these types of exposures. in a merger, these differences are likely to be even
more pronounced. prior to a merger, each legacy company consistently applies
its assumptions, judgments and actuarial methods to estimate reserves.
differences between these assumptions, judgments and actuarial methods need to
be understood and reconciled, and a uniform approach needs to be adopted for
the merged entity. in this situation, material adjustments can and do occur for
reserves related to exposures having a high degree of uncertainty.
analysis of the acquired construction reserves was
completed near the end of the second quarter of 2004. based upon the results of
this analysis, the company increased its estimate of the acquired net
construction reserves by $500 million, including $400 million for construction
defect and $100 million for construction wrap-up claims, and recognized this
change in estimate as an income statement charge in the second quarter. there
was no reinsurance associated with this charge.
surety
reserves. personnel from the predecessor
companies were also able to share detailed spc policyholder information related
to surety reserves upon completion of the merger. access to this detailed information
enabled the company to perform a claim-by-claim review of reserves and claims
handling strategies during the second quarter of 2004 using the combined
expertise of claims adjusters from the legacy companies. this type of review
involves considerable judgment, especially with respect to the economic outlook
within which claims will be settled, estimates for dates of loss occurrence and
evaluations of ibnr exposures for each insured. for example, as a result of the
detailed information obtained concerning contractors with reported claims, the
company considered whether or not losses were incurred but not yet reported on
one or more additional projects for each contractor examined.
also on april1, 2004, the company could begin to
use this detailed information to compare spcs assumptions, judgments and
actuarial methods that were underlying the acquired reserves with its own
assumptions, judgments and
actuarial methods. similarities and differences were found to exist.
similarities included, but were not limited to, recognizing claim reserves when
it was determined that contractors and commercial surety insureds were in
default and thereby unable to meet their obligations, estimating initial ibnr
provisions, and periodically re-evaluating, at least quarterly, the adequacy of
the reserves established based on actual claims recorded and revised estimates
of ibnr. differences included judgments and methods related to determining ibnr
development factors and expected salvage, among others.
that these differences exist is not unusual for surety
reserve estimates. surety is a line of business for which there are low
frequency, high severity, very complex claims for certain exposures,
particularly those related to large construction contractors and commercial
surety insureds. determining the date of loss in these circumstances requires a
high degree of judgment. in addition, the claim reserve estimates even for
reported claims are also highly judgmental. these two factors, among others,
combine to make ibnr reserve estimations for surety extremely difficult. due to
this high degree of uncertainty, the informed judgments of different actuaries
could and do vary materially. as discussed above, in a merger, these
differences are likely to be even more pronounced.
the claim reviews and actuarial analyses were both
completed near the end of the second quarter of 2004. based upon the results of
these reviews and analyses, the company increased its estimate of the acquired
surety reserves by $300 million, net of $170 million of reinsurance, and
recognized this change in estimate as an income statement charge in the second
quarter.
charge
related to the financial condition of a specific construction contractor. prior to the merger and beginning in the third
quarter of 2003, spc disclosed that a large construction contractor for which
it had written several surety bonds was experiencing financial difficulty.
based upon an analysis of the financial condition of the construction
contractor that was performed in the third quarter of 2003, a restructuring
plan was adopted by the construction contractor, its banks, and spc, among
others, as a means to minimize estimated losses. spc monitored the progress of
the construction contractor toward meeting the requirements of the restructuring
plan throughout subsequent quarters. spc also estimated and disclosed its
estimated ultimate net losses related to this exposure, beginning in the third
quarter of 2003 and updated each quarter thereafter, including the effects of
advances made or expected to be made to the construction contractor, applicable
collateral, co-surety participations and reinsurance. the size and complexity
of these particular construction contracts, coupled with the deteriorating
credit quality of the construction contractor and the inherent uncertainty as
to whether it would meet the obligations of the restructuring plan, resulted in
a high degree of judgment in estimating potential losses.
a comprehensive analysis that began in the first
quarter of 2004 was completed during the last half of the second quarter. based
upon this analysis, the company concluded that the contractor would not be able
to meet the targets set forth in its business and restructuring plans.
therefore, the company moved from supporting the contractors restructuring
plan to adopting a workout plan as a means to minimize estimated losses. under
the workout plan, the company would no longer provide additional surety bonds
for new projects of the construction contractor. also as part of the workout plan,
the company was able to implement additional accounting and engineering
procedures for each open project, which included using specialists to implement
additional forecasting, cash management, and reporting procedures, on both a
project-by-project and consolidated level. based upon this second quarter
change to a workout plan and the detailed financial analysis that was able to
be performed, the company increased its estimate of the ultimate net loss by
$252 million, including $9 million of reinsurance. this estimate took into
consideration paid amounts, net receivables, liquidated damages, overhead
costs, additional completion costs, including costs associated with replacing
the contractor, receivable discounts, current and future claims from owners and
subcontractors against the contractor, and the value of collateral, among
others.
the company also commuted
certain reinsurance agreements with a major reinsurer in 2004 resulting in a
$113 million prior year reserve charge (in addition to a current year loss of
$40 million). commutations are a complete and final settlement with a reinsurer
that results in a discharge of all obligations of the parties to the terminated
reinsurance agreement.
cost of catastrophes. in
2006, the cost of catastrophes totaled $103 million (net of reinsurance), all
of which was incurred in the personal insurance segment and resulted from
several wind, rain, hail and snow
storms in the united states throughout the year. in 2005, the
companys cost of catastrophes, net of reinsurance and including reinstatement
premiums of $121 million and state assessments of $43 million, totaled $2.19
billion, primarily resulting from hurricanes katrina, rita and wilma. reinstatement
premiums represent additional premiums payable to reinsurers to restore
coverage limits that have been exhausted as a result of reinsured losses under
certain excess-of-loss reinsurance treaties and are recorded as a reduction of
net written and earned premiums. the majority of catastrophe costs in 2005 were
incurred in the business insurance segment ($1.41 billion) and in the personal
insurance segment ($593 million) in 2004, the cost of catastrophes, net of
reinsurance, totaled $772 million, all of which resulted from four hurricanescharley,
frances, ivan and jeannethat also made landfall in the southeastern united
states.
general and administrative expenses
general and administrative
expenses totaled $3.46 billion in 2006, an increase of $229 million, or 7%,
over the comparable 2005 total of $3.23 billion. the increase in 2006 was
driven by investments made throughout the company to support business growth
and product development, costs related to the companys national advertising
campaign and legal expenses related to investigations of various business
practices by certain governmental agencies (see item 3legal proceedings). these
factors were partially offset by the impact of the favorable resolution of
certain prior-year state tax matters, certain tax benefits, the absence of
catastrophe-related state assessments and lower premium tax-related expenses.
the $284 million increase
in general and administrative expenses in 2005 compared with 2004 primarily
reflected the impact of the merger. in addition, the 2005 total included $43
million of state assessments related to catastrophe losses, and also reflected
investments made for process re-engineering and to support business growth and
product development, primarily in the personal insurance segment. these factors
were partially offset by the benefit of expense efficiencies achieved since the
completion of the merger. included in the 2005 and 2004 totals were $112
million and $92 million, respectively, of amortization expense related to
finite-lived intangible assets acquired in the merger, and a benefit of $12
million and $58 million, respectively, associated with the accretion of the
fair value adjustment to claims and claim adjustment expenses and reinsurance
recoverables. the 2004 total included a $62 million increase in the allowance
for uncollectible amounts due from policyholders for loss-sensitive business
(primarily high-deductible business). this increase resulted from applying the
companys credit-based methodology for determining uncollectible amounts to the
recoverables acquired in the merger. general and administrative expenses in
2004 also included $29 million of restructuring charges related to the merger.
other 2004 claims and
expenses. other items increasing the 2004 claims
and expenses included $296 million of charges to increase the allowances for
estimated uncollectible amounts due from reinsurance recoverables,
policyholders receivables, and co-surety participations on a specific construction
contractor claim. the increase in the allowance for uncollectible reinsurance
recoverables recognized a change in estimated disputes with reinsurers and is
based upon the companys reinsurance strategy of reduced reinsurance
utilization, including the cessation of ongoing business relationships with
certain of spcs reinsurers, and aggressive collection of reinsurance
recoverables. a charge was also recorded to increase the estimated
uncollectible amounts due from policyholders for loss sensitive business
(primarily high deductible business). this increase recognized a change in
estimated uncollectible amounts due and resulted from applying the companys
credit based methodology for determining uncollectible amounts to the
recoverables acquired in the merger. because reinsurance recoverables and
amounts due from policyholders for loss sensitive business are insurance
contract-related assets, these assets are subject to the same types of
estimation variables as loss reserves.
during the second quarter
of 2004, a participating co-surety on the specific construction contractor
described above announced that insurance regulators had approved its submitted
run-off plan. based upon industrys knowledge of the co-suretys run-off plan
and the companys analysis of its financial condition, the company concluded
that it was unlikely to collect the full amount projected to be owed by the
co-surety and established an appropriate level of reserves. in the second quarter of 2005, the
company reached a settlement with the co-surety whereby the co-surety made a
payment to the company and was released from further financial obligations to
the company in connection with the specific construction exposure. the
settlement payment, coupled with the previously established co-surety reserves,
approximated the companys estimate of the co-suretys share of the bonded
losses related to this exposure.
interest expense
interest expense in 2006
was $38 million higher than in 2005, primarily due to the issuance in november2005
of $400 million, 5.50% senior notes due december1, 2015, and the issuance
in june2006
of $400
million, 6.25% senior notes due june20, 2016 and $400 million, 6.75%
senior notes due june20, 2036. the proceeds from the 2006 debt issuances
were used to fund the redemption and maturity in 2006 of certain of the companys
outstanding debt.
the $50 million increase
in interest expense in 2005 over 2004 primarily reflected the impact of a full
year of interest expense on spc debt assumed in the merger on april1,
2004. the companys debt outstanding at december31, 2005 declined by a
net $463 million compared with year-end 2004.
effective tax rate
the companys effective
tax rate on income from continuing operations was 26.5%, 22.8% and 7.3% in
2006, 2005 and 2004, respectively. the 2006 and 2005 effective rate reflected a
higher level of pretax income associated with profitable underwriting
performance. the low 2004 effective rate primarily reflected the impact of
nontaxable investment income on a lower level of pretax income.
gaap combined ratios
the consolidated loss and
loss adjustment expense ratio of 57.5% in 2006 improved by 14.4 points compared
with 2005, primarily reflecting the decline in catastrophe losses. catastrophe
losses accounted for 0.5 points of the 2006 loss and loss adjustment expense
ratio, compared with a 10.3 point impact in 2005. the 2006 loss and loss
adjustment expense ratio included a 1.9 point impact from net favorable prior
year reserve development, whereas the 2005 loss and loss adjustment expense
ratio included a 1.6 point impact from net unfavorable prior year reserve
development. the 2006 loss and loss adjustment expense ratio excluding
catastrophe losses and prior year reserve development improved over the 2005
ratio on the same basis, reflecting improvement in frequency and severity
trends in several lines of business. the underwriting expense ratio for 2006
was 1.2 points higher than the underwriting expense ratio in 2005. the changes
primarily reflect the impact of the increase in general and administrative
expenses described previously. in addition, the 2006 ratio was negatively
impacted by a decline in national accounts fee income, a portion of which is
accounted for as a reduction of expenses for purposes of calculating the expense
ratio. the underwriting expense ratio in 2005 also included a 0.4 point impact
from reinstatement premiums and state assessments.
catastrophe losses
accounted for 10.3 points of the 2005 loss and loss adjustment expense ratio,
compared with 4.0 points in 2004. the loss and loss adjustment expense ratio in
2005 included a 1.6 point impact of net unfavorable prior year reserve
development, whereas the 2004 ratio included a 12.6 point impact of net
unfavorable prior year reserve development. the 2005 loss and loss adjustment
expense ratio also reflected an improvement in current accident year
non-catastrophe related loss experience, compared with 2004, primarily
reflecting reduced claim activity. the 1.1 point increase in the 2005
underwriting expense ratio compared with 2004 reflected the impact of
reinstatement premiums, state assessments, increased commission expenses in the
personal insurance segment and investments made for process re-engineering and
to support business growth and product development, primarily in the personal
insurance segment. these factors were partially offset by expense efficiencies
realized since the completion of the merger.
discontinued operations
in march2005, the
company and nuveen investments jointly announced that the company would
implement a program to divest its 78% equity interest in nuveen investments,
which constituted the companys asset management segment and was acquired as
part of the merger on april1, 2004. the divestiture was completed through
a series of transactions in the second and third quarters of 2005, resulting in
net pretax cash proceeds of $2.40 billion.
the company recorded a net
operating loss from discontinued operations of $663 million in 2005, consisting
primarily of $710 million of tax expense due to the difference between the tax
basis and the
gaap
carrying value of the companys investment in nuveen investments, partially
offset by the companys share of nuveen investments net income prior to
divestiture. the company recorded a pretax gain on disposal of $345 million
($224 million after-tax) in 2005. income from discontinued operations of $88
million in 2004 represented the companys share of nuveen investments net
income for the year.
results of operations by segment
business insurance
results
of the companys business insurance segment were as follows:
(fortheyearendeddecember31,inmillions)
revenues:
earned premiums
$
10,876
$
11,116
$
10,929
net investment income
2,538
2,341
1,980
fee income
other revenues
total revenues
$
14,049
$
14,184
$
13,675
total
claims and expenses
$
10,509
$
12,968
$
13,297
operating
income
$
2,622
$
1,044
$
loss and loss
adjustment expense ratio
60.3
%
81.5
%
87.1
%
underwriting
expense ratio
30.6
28.9
28.1
gaap
combined ratio
90.9
%
110.4
%
115.2
%
overview
operating income of $2.62
billion was $1.58 billion higher than operating income of $1.04 billion in
2005, primarily reflecting the absence of catastrophe losses, net favorable
prior year reserve development, the continuation of favorable current year loss
trends and a strong increase in net investment income. the business insurance
segment incurred no catastrophe losses in 2006, whereas in 2005, the cost of
catastrophes totaled $1.41 billion (including reinstatement premiums of $67
million), resulting from hurricanes katrina, rita and wilma. net favorable
prior year reserve development totaled $21 million in 2006, compared with net
unfavorable prior year reserve development of $757 million in 2005 that was
primarily driven by an increase in asbestos reserves. these factors were
partially offset by an increase in general and administrative expenses and a
decline in fee income in 2006.
operating income of $1.04
billion in 2005 was significantly higher than operating income of $460 million
in 2004, primarily due to a reduction in net unfavorable prior year reserve
development, the impact of the merger and a strong increase in net investment
income. these factors were partially offset by a significant increase in the
cost of catastrophes in 2005. net unfavorable prior year development totaled
$757 million in 2005, compared with $2.03 billion in 2004. the 2005 total was
primarily driven by a charge to increase asbestos reserves, whereas the 2004
total included $1.22 billion of charges to increase asbestos and environmental
reserves, and the $500 million charge to increase construction reserves
acquired in the merger, which is described in more detail in the consolidated
overview section herein. the cost of catastrophes totaled $1.41 billion in
2005, compared with $532 million in 2004. catastrophes in both years were the
result of the hurricanes described in the consolidated overview section
herein.
earned premiums
earned premiums of $10.88
billion in 2006 decreased by $240 million, or 2%, compared with 2005, as
premium increases in the majority of the segments ongoing operations were more
than offset by the continuing decline in other runoff operations earned
premiums, including the impact of the sale of the personal catastrophe risk
operation in november2005. the personal catastrophe risk operation
accounted
for $111 million of earned premiums in 2005. earned premiums in 2005 were
reduced by $67 million of reinstatement premiums related to catastrophe losses.
the $187 million increase
in earned premiums in 2005 compared with 2004 primarily reflected the impact of
the merger, which was largely offset by a significant decline in runoff
operations, where business was intentionally being non-renewed, and a decline
in certain ongoing operations due to a lower level of written premium volume in
the last half of 2004 and first half of 2005. in addition, catastrophe-related
reinstatement premiums reduced net earned premium volume in 2005 by $67
million.
net investment income
refer to the net
investment income section of the consolidated results of operations
discussion herein for a description of the factors contributing to the increase
in the companys net investment income in 2006 and 2005.
fee income
national accounts is the
primary source of fee income due to its service businesses, which include claim
and loss prevention services to large companies that choose to self-insure a
portion of their insurance risks, and claims and policy management services to
workers compensation residual market pools. the $72 million decline in fee
income in 2006 resulted from lower serviced claim volume in workers
compensation residual market pools, the impact on fee income from lower loss
costs due to california workers compensation reforms and lower new business
volume due to increased competition. in 2005, the $43 million decline in fee
income compared with 2004 was primarily due to increased competition, including
the loss of several large customers in the second half of 2004 and early 2005.
claims and expenses
claim and claim adjustment
expenses in 2006 totaled $6.85 billion, down $2.51 billion from the 2005 total
of $9.36 billion. the 2005 total included catastrophe losses of $1.32 billion,
nearly all of which resulted from hurricanes katrina, rita and wilma, whereas
the 2006 total included no catastrophe losses.
net favorable prior year
reserve development totaled $21 million in 2006. net unfavorable prior year
reserve development in 2005 was $757 million. the 2006 net favorable prior year
reserve development was primarily concentrated in the commercial multi-peril,
general liability, property and commercial automobile lines of business,
partially offset by increases to asbestos and environmental reserves, as well
as reserve strengthening for assumed reinsurance business in runoff. the
commercial multi-peril and liability lines of business experienced better than
anticipated loss development that was attributable to several factors,
including improving legal and judicial environments, as well as enhanced risk
control, underwriting and claim process initiatives. the favorable prior year
reserve development in the property line of business primarily reflected less demand
surge inflation than originally estimated for 2005 accident year
non-catastrophe and catastrophe losses. demand surge refers to significant
short-term increases in building material and labor costs due to a sharp
increase in demand for those materials and services. the commercial automobile
line of business experienced better than expected loss development which was
attributable to the favorable legal and judicial environments, claim handling
initiatives focused on the automobile line of insurance and improvements in
auto safety technology. the reserve strengthening in assumed reinsurance was
primarily due to changes in projected loss development driven by an
unanticipated change in the claim settlement patterns of the underlying
casualty exposures. in 2005, net unfavorable prior year reserve development was
driven by an increase to asbestos reserves of $830 million and reserve
strengthening for environmental and assumed reinsurance, which is in runoff. those
increases were partially offset by favorable prior year reserve development
from lower frequency and severity for both casualty and property-related lines
of business. drivers of the reduction in both frequency and severity were
increasingly favorable legal and
judicial environments, coupled with better than expected results from changes
in policy provisions as well as underwriting and pricing criteria. company
initiatives
relating to claims handling, which affected claims
staffing and workflows, also are believed to have contributed to the emergence of favorable severity experience in 2005.
claims and claim
adjustment expenses in 2005 of $9.36 billion declined from the 2004 total of
$9.84 billion. included in those totals were $1.32 billion and $532 million,
respectively, of catastrophe losses (net of reinsurance). net unfavorable prior
year reserve development totaled $757 million in 2005, as described above. net
unfavorable prior year reserve development totaled $2.03 billion in 2004, which
included a $928 million charge to strengthen asbestos reserves, a $290 million
charge to strengthen environmental reserves and the $500 million charge to
increase construction reserves acquired in the merger described in the consolidated
overview section herein. also included in the net unfavorable prior year
reserve development in 2004 was a $174 million addition to the reserve for
uncollectible reinsurance recoverables, $150 million recorded in tpcs
construction operation prior to the merger, $74 million from the commutation of
agreements with a major reinsurer and other net unfavorable prior year reserve
development, primarily concentrated in the companys gulf operations. results
in 2004 also reflected increased current year loss ratios on portions of the
construction book of business. partially offsetting the impact of these factors
was favorable prior year reserve development in several core business insurance
operations, which resulted from reductions in the frequency of non-catastrophe
related losses attributable to improved underwriting and pricing strategies in
prior years, the results of which emerged in 2004.
approximately half of the
$155 million 2006 pre-tax increase to asbestos reserves was due to an increase
in the projected defense costs for ten policyholders. additionally, $15 million
of the pretax reserve adjustment was attributable to a delay in the approval
and expected payment of the previously announced settlement with ppg
industries, inc. as part of the pittsburgh corning bankruptcy reorganization
plan. the remainder of the reserve adjustment was primarily due to continued
litigation activity against smaller, peripheral defendants. in 2005, the asbestos
charge resulted, in part, from higher than expected defense costs due to
increased trial activity for seriously impaired plaintiffs and prolonged
litigation before cases are settled or dismissed. the 2005 charge also
considered the january2006 court decision voiding, on procedural grounds,
the previously rendered favorable arbitration decision in the ongoing acands
litigation. the asbestos charge recorded in 2004 primarily resulted from an
increase in litigation costs and activity surrounding peripheral defendants. the
$120 million environmental reserve addition in 2006 was primarily due to higher
than expected defense and settlement costs. in 2005, the environmental reserve
charge was primarily related to declaratory judgment costs, whereas the significant
2004 charge was related to revised estimates of costs related to settlement
initiatives. see the asbestos claims and litigation and environmental claims
and litigation sections herein for further discussion of these reserves.
general and administrative
expenses in 2006 totaled $2.10 billion, 3% higher than the comparable total of
$2.04 billion in 2005. the increase in 2006 primarily reflected the segments
expenditures to support business growth and product development, the segments
share of costs associated with the companys national advertising campaign and
legal expenses related to investigations of various business practices by
certain governmental agencies. general and administrative expenses in 2005 were
4% higher than the 2004 total of $1.95 billion, which primarily reflected the
impact of the merger. the 2004 total included merger-related charges and an
increase in the allowance for uncollectible amounts due from policyholders.
gaap combined ratio
the loss and loss
adjustment expense ratio in 2006 of 60.3% improved by 21.2 points compared with
the 2005 ratio of 81.5%, primarily due to the absence of catastrophe losses and
net favorable prior year reserve development in 2006 (versus net unfavorable
prior year reserve development in 2005). catastrophe losses accounted for 12.3
points of the 2005 loss and loss adjustment expense ratio. net favorable prior
year reserve development in 2006 provided a 0.2 point benefit to the loss and
loss adjustment expense ratio, whereas net unfavorable prior year reserve
development in 2005 accounted for 6.8 points of the loss and loss adjustment
expense ratio. the 2006 loss and loss adjustment expense ratio excluding
catastrophe
losses
and prior year reserve development improved over the 2005 ratio on the same
basis, reflecting improvement in frequency and severity trends in several lines
of business.
the loss and loss
adjustment expense ratio in 2005 included a 12.3 point impact from catastrophe
losses, compared with a 4.9 point impact from catastrophe losses in 2004. net
unfavorable prior year reserve development accounted for 6.8 points and 18.6
points, respectively, of the 2005 and 2004 loss and loss adjustment expense
ratios. excluding these factors from both years, the 2005 loss and loss
adjustment expense ratio improved over the comparable 2004 ratio, reflecting
the improvement in current accident year loss experience compared with 2004.
the underwriting expense
ratio for 2006 was 1.7 points higher than the 2005 ratio, primarily reflecting
the increases in expenses described above, and the impact of declines in fee
income. a portion of fee income is accounted for as a reduction of expenses for
purposes of calculating the expense ratio. catastrophe-related reinstatement
premiums of $67 million and catastrophe-related state assessments of $18
million added 0.3 points to the 2005 expense ratio.
the underwriting expense
ratio in 2005 was 0.8 points higher than 2004, primarily reflecting the
intentional decline in runoff operations earned premiums, a decline in certain
ongoing operations earned premiums due to a lower level of written premium
volume in the last half of 2004 and first half of 2005, and the 0.3 point
negative impact of reinstatement premiums and catastrophe-related state
assessments referred to previously. these factors were partially offset by the
favorable impact of merger-related expense savings throughout the segment and
personnel reductions in the business insurance other sector. the 2004 underwriting
expense ratio included the impact of merger-related restructuring charges and
an increase in the allowance for uncollectible amounts due from policyholders.
written premiums
the
business insurance segments gross and net written premiums by market were as
follows:
grosswrittenpremiums
(fortheyearendeddecember31,inmillions)
select accounts
$
2,733
$
2,799
$
2,631
commercial
accounts
2,613
2,535
2,463
national accounts
2,169
2,627
2,410
industry-focused
underwriting
2,279
2,154
1,785
target risk
underwriting
2,187
2,040
1,809
specialized
distribution
1,036
total business insurance core
13,017
13,075
11,914
business
insurance other
1,120
total business insurance
$
13,047
$
13,453
$
13,034
netwrittenpremiums
(fortheyearendeddecember31,inmillions)
select accounts
$
2,663
$
2,722
$
2,555
commercial accounts
2,376
2,330
2,273
national accounts
1,135
1,230
1,040
industry-focused
underwriting
2,196
2,080
1,747
target risk underwriting
1,629
1,482
1,345
specialized distribution
1,022
total
business insurance core
11,021
10,752
9,767
business insurance other
total business insurance
$
11,046
$
10,999
$
10,374
in business insurance core
operations, gross written premiums in 2006 were down slightly from 2005. net
written premiums in 2006, however, increased slightly over 2005. the disparity
between gross and net written premium growth rates in 2006 was primarily due to
a change in the structure of reinsurance coverage in the companys discover re
subsidiary in national accounts that resulted in a decline in ceded premiums. for
purposes of comparison between 2006 and 2005 net written premium volume, the
impact of a higher level of ceded premiums for property catastrophe reinsurance
in 2006 was virtually equivalent to the impact of the $67 million of
catastrophe-related reinstatement premiums in 2005. net written premium growth
in business insurance core operations in 2006 was primarily concentrated in target
risk underwriting and industry-focused underwriting, driven by continued strong
business retention rates, renewal price increases and higher new business
volume throughout the majority of businesses comprising these markets. the
decline in national accounts net written premiums primarily reflected a
reduction in premiums related to favorable loss experience on business priced
on a loss-sensitive basis and lower new business volume, partially offset by
the decline in ceded premiums at discover re due to a change in the structure
of reinsurance coverage. in business insurance other operations, gross and net
written premiums were down significantly from the comparable 2005 totals,
reflecting the sale of the personal catastrophe risk operation in november2005
and the intentional non-renewal of business in the runoff operations comprising
this category.
in 2005, business
insurance core gross and net written premiums in 2005 increased 10% over the
comparable 2004 totals, primarily reflecting the impact of the merger. however,
2005 written premium volume in business insurance core operations declined when
compared with 2004 on a pro forma combined basis, reflecting increased
competition in the marketplace and the repositioning of the construction book
of business. throughout business insurance core operations (excluding
construction, due to the impact of repositioning the book of business), business
retention levels increased over 2004, renewal pricing was flat with 2004, and
new business levels improved over 2004. net written premiums in 2005 for
business insurance core operations were reduced by $67 million of
catastrophe-related reinstatement premiums. in business insurance other
operations, gross and net written premiums declined 66% and 59%, respectively,
from the comparable 2004 totals, primarily reflecting the intentional
non-renewal of business in the runoff operations comprising this category.
select accounts. net
written premiums of $2.66 billion in 2006 declined 2% from 2005, primarily
reflecting the impact of a reduction in premium volume from certain national
small business insurance programs, the majority of which was transferred to the
specialized distribution market. excluding the impact of the business
transferred, net written premiums increased by approximately 2% in 2006.
business retention rates remained strong and increased over 2005, and focused
investments in technology and personnel led to improvement in new business
volume over 2005. renewal price changes for the select accounts market in 2006
were consistent with 2005, as modest pricing pressures in non-coastal coverages
were largely offset by price increases for coastal coverages. in 2005, net
written premiums grew 7% over 2004, primarily reflecting the impact of the
merger. however, 2005 written premiums declined from 2004 on a pro forma
combined basis. business retention levels in 2005 increased over 2004 and were
also at historically high levels. renewal price changes in 2005 were in the low
single digit range for the year, which was lower than renewal price increases
in 2004. new business levels in 2005 declined slightly from 2004.
commercial
accounts. net written premiums of $2.38 billion
in 2006 increased 2% over 2005, driven by a strong increase in business
retention rates and an improvement in renewal pricing. in 2005, net written
premiums of $2.33 billion grew $57 million, or 3%, over 2004 volume of $2.27
billion, reflecting the impact of the merger. however, 2005 net written
premiums declined from 2004 on a pro forma combined basis, although business
retention rates in this market in 2005 increased over 2004. new business volume
also grew over 2004. renewal price changes in 2005 in commercial accounts
declined from 2004 and were in the low single digits for the year, reflecting
the increased competitive market conditions.
national
accounts. net written premiums in 2006 declined
by $95 million, or 8%, from 2005, primarily reflecting a reduction in premiums
related to favorable loss experience on business priced on a loss-sensitive
basis and lower new business volume, partially offset by the decline in ceded
premiums at discover re due to a change in the structure of reinsurance
coverage. in 2005, net written premiums grew $190 million, or 18%, over 2004,
reflecting the impact of the merger and changes in discover res reinsurance
program.
industry-focused
underwriting. net written premiums of $2.20
billion increased by 6% over 2005, driven by growth in the construction and oil&
gas business units. favorable economic conditions in these industry sectors,
significant increases in business retention rates and continued strong new
business volume contributed to the increase in premium volume in 2006 in these
two business units. the remaining three business units in this markettechnology,
agribusiness and public sectorall achieved lesser degrees of net written
premium growth over 2005. net written premium volume of $2.08 billion in 2005
increased 19% over the 2004 total of $1.75 billion, primarily reflecting the
impact of the merger. on a pro forma
combined basis, constructions net written premiums in 2005 declined from 2004,
reflecting lower business volumes related to the process of aligning the
underwriting profile of the two predecessor companies during the latter half of
2004 and the first half of 2005. oil& gas net written premiums in
2005 grew significantly over 2004, primarily due to the impact of the merger,
strong business retention rates and higher new business volume.
target
risk underwriting. net written premiums of $1.63
billion in 2006 increased by 10% over 2005, driven by strong growth in the
national property and inland marine business units. significant renewal price
increases, particularly for southeastern u.s. catastrophe-prone exposures, and
strong business retention rates were the primary factors accounting for net
written premium growth in these two business units in 2006. the ocean marine
business unit also contributed to net written premium growth in 2006, primarily
due to a decrease in the amount of business ceded. in 2005, net written
premiums of $1.48 billion were 10% higher than 2004 net written premium volume
of $1.35 billion, driven by the impact of the merger. on a pro forma combined
basis, however, net written premium volume in 2005 declined from 2004,
primarily due to competitive market conditions for property and inland marine
coverages. ocean marine premium volume grew significantly in 2005, driven by
renewal rights transactions.
specialized
distribution. net written premium volume in 2006
of $1.02 billion increased 13% over 2005, primarily driven by the transfer of
certain national small business insurance programs from select accounts to the
national programs business unit. in addition, northland also experienced
premium growth in 2006, primarily resulting from higher business retention
rates and new business volume in commercial trucking, its primary line of
business. in 2005, net written premium volume of $908 million grew $101
million, or 13%, over 2004 net written premiums of $807 million. the growth in
2005 was concentrated in national programs and primarily reflected the impact
of the merger and the transfer of certain program business from commercial
accounts. on a pro forma combined basis, net written premiums in 2005 were
level with 2004.
in business insurance
other, the 90% and 59% declines in 2006 and 2005 net premium volume,
respectively, compared with the respective prior years reflected the impact of
business in runoff and the sale of the
companys personal catastrophe risk operation in november2005. the runoff
healthcare,
reinsurance
and international business acquired in the merger produced minimal written
premium volume in 2006, 2005 and 2004.
financial,
professional& international insurance
results
of the companys financial,
professional& international insurance segment were as follows:
(fortheyearendeddecember31,inmillions)
revenues:
earned premiums
$
3,321
$
3,197
$
2,529
net investment income
fee income
other revenues
total revenues
$
3,776
$
3,578
$
2,781
total
claims and expenses
$
2,968
$
2,961
$
3,284
operating
income (loss)
$
$
$
(322
)
loss and loss
adjustment expense ratio
53.7
%
56.8
%
92.5
%
underwriting
expense ratio
35.3
35.7
37.0
gaap
combined ratio
89.0
%
92.5
%
129.5
%
overview
operating income of $609 million in 2006 increased by
$218 million, or 56%, over 2005. the improvement was driven by the absence of
catastrophe losses in 2006, an increase in net investment income and growth in
business volume, partially offset by a decline in net favorable prior year
reserve development and an increase in general and administrative expenses. operating
income in 2006 also benefited from favorable tax impacts from businesses
outside of the united states, including an $18 million benefit associated with
the pending sale of the companys mexican surety subsidiary, afianzadora
insurgentes, s.a. de c.v. no catastrophe losses were incurred in 2006, whereas
results in 2005 included $191 million in catastrophe costs, the majority of
which resulted from hurricanes katrina, rita and wilma. net favorable prior
year reserve development totaled $14 million in 2006, compared with $72 million
in 2005.
operating income of $391
million in 2005 improved by $713 million over the operating loss of $322
million in 2004. the significant improvement in 2005 operating income reflected
net favorable prior year reserve development, as well as strong net investment
income, improved current accident year results in bond& financial
products, and lower commission expenses in several lines of business. operating
results in 2005 included a cost of catastrophes of $191 million, compared with
$51 million in 2004. the operating loss of $322 million in 2004 was driven by
net unfavorable prior year reserve development of $739 million, including
significant charges related to the surety reserves acquired in the merger and
other reserving actions, which are described in more detail in the consolidated
overview section herein.
earned premiums
earned premiums in 2006 increased $124 million, or 4%,
over 2005, primarily driven by growth in bond& financial products. in
addition, earned premiums in 2005 were reduced by $33 million of reinstatement
premiums related to catastrophe losses, primarily in the companys operations
at lloyds. earned premium volume in international and lloyds in 2006 declined
slightly from 2005, primarily reflecting the elimination of a one-month reporting
lag at lloyds in 2005 that resulted in $48 million of additional earned
premiums being included in 2005 results. also contributing to the decline in
earned premiums in international and lloyds in 2006 was the sale of certain
classes of personal lines business at lloyds in the first quarter of 2005,
which had accounted for $43 million of earned premiums in 2005.
earned premiums in 2005
increased $668 million, or 26%, over 2004, primarily reflecting the impact of
the merger. earned premiums in 2005 were reduced by $33 million in
catastrophe-related reinstatement premiums. earned premiums in 2005 also
reflected the inclusion of one additional month of premium volume to eliminate
a reporting lag at the companys operations at lloyds, the impact of which was
partially offset by the sale of certain classes of personal insurance business
at those lloyds operations. earned premiums in 2004 were reduced by $76
million of reinstatement premiums primarily related to a reserve charge in bond&
financial products.
net investment
income
refer to the net
investment income section of the consolidated results of operations
discussion herein for a description of the factors contributing to the increase
in the companys net investment income in 2006 and 2005.
claims and expenses
claims and claims adjustment expenses in 2006 totaled
$1.79 billion, compared with $1.82 billion during the same period of 2005. the
2006 total included no catastrophe losses and $14 million of net favorable
prior year reserve development, whereas the 2005 total included $158 million of
catastrophe losses and $72 million of net favorable prior year reserve
development. net favorable prior year reserve development in 2005 was
attributable to the better than anticipated favorable impact from changes in
underwriting and pricing strategies for international property-related
exposures.
claim and claim adjustment expenses totaled $1.82
billion in 2005, down significantly from the 2004 total of $2.35 billion. the
2005 total included $158 million of catastrophe losses, compared with $40
million of catastrophe costs recorded in 2004. catastrophe losses in both
periods were driven by the hurricanes described previously. net favorable prior
year reserve development in 2005 of $72 million was driven by international. net
unfavorable prior year reserve development totaled $739 million in 2004, which
included the $300 million charge to increase the estimate of the acquired net
surety reserves in bond& financial products, and the $252 million
charge related to the financial condition of a specific construction
contractor, both of which are described in more detail in the consolidated
overview section herein. results in 2004 also reflected a $60 million reserve
increase related to the commutation of agreements with a major reinsurer, a
charge to increase the allowance for estimated uncollectible amounts due from a
co-surety on a specific construction contractor claim, and increased current
year loss ratios on portions of the bond& financial products book of
business.
general and administrative
expenses in 2006 totaled $536 million, an increase of 5% over 2005. the
increase in 2006 primarily reflected the segments expenditures to support
business growth and the segments share of costs associated with the companys
national advertising campaign and legal expenses related to investigations of
various business practices by certain governmental agencies. general and
administrative expenses in 2005 totaled $509 million, an increase of 26% over
the 2004 total of $405 million which primarily reflected the impact of the
merger. the 2005 total included the impacts of a decline in commission expenses
and expense efficiencies realized as a result of the merger.
gaap combined ratio
the loss and loss adjustment expense ratio of 53.7% in
2006 was 3.1 points lower than the ratio of 56.8% in 2005. the 2006 ratio
included no impact of catastrophe losses and a 0.4 point benefit from net
favorable prior year reserve development, whereas the 2005 ratio included a 5.5
point impact from catastrophes and a 2.3 point benefit from net favorable prior
year reserve development. excluding those factors in each year, the 2006 ratio
was slightly higher than the 2005 ratio. the loss and loss adjustment expense
ratio in 2004 included a 2.0 point impact from catastrophe losses, and a 29.3
point impact from net
unfavorable prior year
reserve development. excluding both factors in each year, the 2005 loss and
loss adjustment expense ratio improved by 7.6 points compared with the 2004
ratio, reflecting the significant improvement in current year loss experience
in 2005.
the underwriting expense
ratio in 2006 improved by 0.4 points compared with 2005, benefiting from the
absence of catastrophe-related reinstatement premiums and increased business volume.
reinstatement premiums of $33 million increased the 2005 underwriting expense
ratio by 0.4 points. in 2005, the underwriting expense ratio improved 1.3
points compared with 2004, reflecting the impact of the merger and expense
efficiencies realized since the completion of the merger.
written premiums
financial,
professional& international insurance gross and net written premiums
by market were as follows:
grosswrittenpremiums
(for the year
ended december31, in millions)
bond&
financial products
$
2,657
$
2,531
$
2,102
international and
lloyds
1,324
1,278
1,011
total
financial, professional& international insurance
$
3,981
$
3,809
$
3,113
netwrittenpremiums
(fortheyearendeddecember31,inmillions)
bond&
financial products
$
2,255
$
2,117
$
1,819
international and
lloyds
1,138
1,042
total
financial, professional& international
insurance
$
3,393
$
3,159
$
2,708
the financial, professional& international
insurance segments gross and net written premiums in 2006 increased 5% and 7%,
respectively, over 2005. growth in net written premium volume in 2006 resulted
from strong construction surety volume in bond& financial products,
strong price increases for southeastern u.s. catastrophe-prone exposures in the
companys operations at lloyds, strong business retention rates and new
business volume in international, and the absence of catastrophe-related
reinstatement premiums. the bond& financial products category
represents the combination of the companys previous bond and financial&
professional services marketing groups. the elimination of a reporting lag at
the companys operations at lloyds resulted in $39 million and $31 million of
additional gross and net written premium volume in 2005, respectively. in bond&
financial products (excluding the surety line of business, for which these are
not relevant measures), business retention rates in 2006 remained strong and
increased over 2005, while renewal price increases remained positive, but
declined from 2005. new business volume was down from 2005. for international
in 2006, business retention rates increased over 2005, renewal price changes
declined slightly and new business volume increased when compared with 2005. net
written premiums in the financial, professional& international
insurance segment for 2005 were reduced by $33 million of catastrophe-related
reinstatement premiums, primarily related to the companys operations at lloyds.
gross and net written premiums in 2005 increased 22%
and 17%, respectively, over written premium volume in 2004. the increase in
gross and net written premiums in 2005 primarily reflected the impact of the
merger. net written premiums in 2005 were reduced by the $33 million of
catastrophe-related reinstatement premiums, whereas net written premiums in
2004 were reduced by $76 million of reinstatement premiums primarily related to
reserving actions in bond& financial products. gross and net written
premiums in 2005 declined compared with 2004 volume on a pro forma combined
basis.
contributing to the
decline in written premiums was the sale of certain credit-related personal
lines classes of business previously written at lloyds in 2005. the decline
was partially offset by the elimination of the reporting lag at lloyds and
premium growth in bond& financial products. in 2005, approximately
$114 million of gross written premiums previously written in the companys gulf
operation (included in the business insurance segment) were written in bond&
financial products, compared with $90 million of gross written premiums in
2004.
in bond&
financial products excluding surety, business retention rates in 2005 increased
slightly over 2004. new business volume and renewal price changes were also
higher than in 2004. as discussed previously, in the first quarter of 2005, the
company implemented changes in the timing and structure of reinsurance
purchased, which resulted in a slight increase in financial, professional&
international insurance ceded premiums in 2005 over what would have been ceded
prior to the changes being implemented. in international in 2005, business
retention rates increased, and new business volume declined compared with 2004.
personal insurance
results
of the companys personal insurance segment were as follows:
(fortheyearendeddecember31,inmillions)
revenues:
earned premiums
$
6,563
$
6,028
$
5,580
net investment income
other revenues
total revenues
$
7,205
$
6,581
$
6,113
total
claims and expenses
$
5,555
$
5,464
$
4,732
operating
income
$
1,132
$
$
loss and loss
adjustment expense ratio
54.8
%
62.2
%
58.3
%
underwriting
expense ratio
28.3
26.9
24.9
gaap
combined ratio
83.1
%
89.1
%
83.2
%
overview
operating income of $1.13 billion in 2006 was $357
million, or 46%, higher than operating income of $775 million in 2005. results
in 2006 reflected a significant decline in catastrophe losses, strong growth in
business volume, continued favorable current accident year loss trends and an
increase in net investment income, partially offset by an increase in general
and administrative expenses. catastrophe losses in 2006 totaled $103 million,
which resulted from several wind, rain, hail and snow storms throughout the
year in the united states. results in 2005 included a cost of catastrophes of
$593 million, primarily resulting from hurricanes katrina, rita and wilma. results
in both years benefited from significant net favorable prior year reserve
development, which totaled $359 million in 2006 and $360 million in 2005.
operating income of $775
million in 2005 was $164 million lower than operating income of $939 million in
2004, largely due to the $593 million cost of catastrophes. the cost of
catastrophes in 2004 totaled $189 million, the majority of which resulted from
four hurricanes that struck the southeastern united states. the personal
insurance segment benefited from continued low non-catastrophe related
frequency levels, net favorable prior year reserve development of $360 million
and strong net investment income levels in 2005.
earned premiums
earned premiums of $6.56
billion in 2006 increased 9% over the 2005 total of $6.03 billion, primarily
due to significant new business volume, renewal price increases and continued
strong business retention rates over the prior twelve months. earned premiums
in 2005 were reduced by $21 million of catastrophe-related reinstatement
premiums. earned premiums of $6.03 billion in 2005 increased $448 million, or
8%, over 2004 earned premiums of $5.58 billion, reflecting continued strong
business retention levels, new business volumes and renewal price increases
over the prior twelve months.
net investment
income
refer to the net
investment income section of the consolidated results of operations
discussion herein for a description of the factors contributing to the increase
in the companys net investment income in 2006 and 2005.
claims and expenses
claims and claim adjustment expenses in 2006 totaled
$3.60 billion, compared with $3.75 billion in 2005. the $154 million decline
primarily reflected a reduction in catastrophe losses, which was partially
offset by the impact of higher business volume in 2006. catastrophe losses
totaled $103 million in 2006, down significantly from the 2005 total of $547
million.
net favorable prior year reserve development in 2006
and 2005 was $359 million and $360 million, respectively. the net favorable
prior year reserve development in 2006 was driven by better than expected loss
experience in the auto bodily injury and non-catastrophe related homeowners and
other lines of business, and a reduction in loss estimates for the 2005
hurricanes. in the automobile line of business, for 2006 and 2005, the
improvement was partially driven by better than expected results from changes
in claim handling practices. these changes included practices which have
allowed case reserves to be established more accurately earlier in the claim
settlement process, thereby changing historical loss development patterns. in
addition, for both years, industry and company initiatives to fight fraud in
several states led to a decrease in the total number of claims and a change in
historical loss development patterns. in the homeowners and other line of
business, favorable prior year reserve development in 2006 and 2005 was
partially driven by a significant decrease in the number of claims,
attributable to changes in the marketplace, including higher deductibles and
fewer small-dollar claims. these changes also resulted in a change in
historical loss development patterns. in addition, for 2006, non-catastrophe
related homeowners and other loss experience was favorable due to continued
evidence of a less than expected impact from demand surge, which refers to
significant short-term increases in building material and labor costs due to a
sharp increase in demand for those materials and services. approximately $100
million of net favorable prior year reserve development in 2006 resulted from a
reduction in loss estimates for catastrophes incurred in 2005, primarily due to
lower than expected additional living expense losses related to hurricane
katrina.
in 2005, claims and claim adjustment expenses included
catastrophe losses of $547 million, compared with $189 million in 2004. catastrophe
losses in both years were primarily the result of hurricanes. net favorable
prior year reserve development in 2005 was $360 million, as described above,
compared with net favorable prior year reserve development of $378 million in
2004. in 2004, net favorable prior year reserve development in the homeowners
and other line of business was driven by a significant decrease in the number
of claims, attributable to changes in the marketplace, including higher policy
deductible levels and fewer small-dollar claims. these changes resulted in a
change in the historical loss development patterns. net favorable prior year
reserve development in the automobile line of business was driven by better
than expected frequency and severity which is believed to have been caused by
societal trends. in addition, both
industry and internal
initiatives to fight fraud in several states caused a decrease in the total
number of claims, as well as a change in the historical loss development
patterns.
general and administrative
expenses totaled $804 million in 2006, an increase of $139 million, or 21%,
over the 2005 total of $665 million. the increase in expenses over 2005
reflected increased business volume, the segments continued investments to
support business growth and product development, legal expenses related to
investigations of various business practices by certain governmental agencies,
and the segments share of costs associated with the companys national
advertising campaign. the 2005 total included $25 million of
catastrophe-related assessments. in 2005, general and administrative expenses
were $129 million higher than the 2004 total of $536 million, primarily
reflecting business growth, investments to support business growth and the
catastrophe-related assessments.
gaap combined ratio
the loss and loss adjustment expense ratio of 54.8% in
2006 was 7.4 points lower than the comparable 2005 ratio of 62.2%. the 2006
ratio included a 1.6 point impact of catastrophe losses and a 5.5 point benefit
from net favorable prior year reserve development. the 2005 loss and loss
adjustment expense ratio included a 9.3 point impact of catastrophe losses and
a 6.0 point benefit from net favorable prior year reserve development. excluding
those factors from both years, the loss and loss adjustment expense ratio in
2006 was slightly lower than the comparable 2005 ratio, reflecting continued
favorable trends in current accident year loss experience. the loss and loss
adjustment expense ratio in 2004 included a 3.4 point impact from catastrophe
losses and a 6.8 point benefit from net favorable prior year reserve
development. excluding the impact of these factors in both 2005 and 2004, the
2005 loss and loss adjustment expense ratio improved over the 2004 ratio,
reflecting better current accident year loss experience.
the underwriting expense ratio of 28.3% in 2006 was
1.4 points higher than the 2005 expense ratio of 26.9%, primarily reflecting
the impact of the increase in general and administrative expenses described
above, and a slight increase in commission expenses. in 2005, reinstatement
premiums related to catastrophe losses reduced earned premium volume by $21
million, and catastrophe-related assessments from various insurance pools increased
taxes, licenses and fees by $25 million. these factors combined to result in a 0.5
point unfavorable impact on the personal insurance segments 2005 underwriting
expense ratio.
the 2.0 point increase in
the underwriting expense ratio in 2005 compared with 2004 reflected an increase
in commission expenses, other insurance expenses, and taxes, licenses and fees,
and the 0.5 point impact of reinstatement premiums and catastrophe-related
assessments described above. the increase in commissions reflected a changing
product mix and higher agent profit sharing expenses. the increase in other
insurance expenses reflected the impact of process re-engineering investments
and investments in personnel, technology and infrastructure to support business
growth and product development.
written premiums
the
personal insurance segments gross and net written premiums by product line
were as follows:
grosswrittenpremiums
(fortheyearendeddecember31,inmillions)
automobile
$
3,731
$
3,526
$3,470
homeowners and other
3,280
2,948
2,641
total personal insurance
$7,011
$6,474
$6,111
netwrittenpremiums
(fortheyearendeddecember31,inmillions)
automobile
$
3,692
$
3,477
$
3,433
homeowners and other
3,019
2,751
2,496
total personal insurance
$
6,711
$
6,228
$
5,929
gross and net written
premiums in 2006 increased 8% over 2005. net written premium volume in 2006
reflected increased costs for property catastrophe coverage (which reduces net
written premiums), while net written premiums in 2005 were reduced by $21
million of catastrophe-related reinstatement premiums. in the automobile line
of business, net written premium growth of 6% in 2006 over 2005 primarily
reflected a strong increase in new business, partially offset by the impact of
transitioning to six-month policy terms in the second half of the year for the
companys multivariate pricing product that resulted in a lower amount of
reported net written premiums in 2006. business retention rates in the
automobile line of business remained strong and consistent with prior year
rates. renewal price changes in 2006 remained positive but were slightly below
those in 2005. new business volume in 2006 was significantly higher than in
2005. the companys multivariate pricing product in the automobile line of
business had been introduced in 37 states and the district of columbia by the
end of 2006.
in the homeowners and
other line of business, net written premiums in 2006 grew 10% over 2005. business
retention rates and new business volume in this line of business remained
strong and increased over 2005. renewal price changes in 2006 remained positive
but declined from 2005. net written premium volume in this line of business in
2006 also benefited from cross-selling initiatives involving the companys
automobile multivariate pricing product.
gross and net written
premiums in 2005 increased 6% and 5%, respectively, over 2004. growth in 2005
was concentrated in the homeowners and other product line, driven by continued
renewal price increases and new business volume. business retention rates in
both the automobile and homeowners and other lines of business remained strong,
and were consistent with 2004. in the automobile line, renewal price increases
in 2005 remained positive, but declined when compared with 2004. however, new
business volume in 2005 in the automobile line increased over 2004, primarily
due to the introduction of the companys new multivariate pricing product in
selected states.
the personal insurance
segment had approximately 7.1 million and 6.6 million policies in force at december31,
2006 and 2005, respectively. in the automobile line of business, policies in
force at december31, 2006 increased 10% over the same date in 2005. policies
in force in the homeowners and other line of business at december31, 2006
grew by 8% over the same date in 2005.
interest expense and other
(fortheyearendeddecember31,inmillions)
net loss
$
(163
)
$
(184
)
$
(182
)
the $21 million decline in
net loss for interest expense and other in 2006 compared with 2005 was
primarily due to a $27 million after-tax gain realized on the redemption of the
companys $593 million, 7.6% subordinated debentures. results in 2006 also
reflected the favorable resolution of various prior year federal and state tax
matters and the absence of expenses associated with the amortization of
discount on forward contracts related to the companys divestiture of nuveen
investments that impacted the 2005 loss. these factors were partially offset by
incremental interest expense in 2006 due to the issuance in november2005
of $400 million, 5.50% senior notes due december1, 2015, and the issuance
in june2006 of $400 million, 6.25% senior notes due june20, 2016
and $400 million, 6.75% senior notes due june20, 2036. the increase in
net loss for interest expense and other in 2005 over 2004 was primarily due to
incremental interest expense on debt assumed in the merger and a reduction in
net investment income, which were mostly offset by the absence of non-recurring
merger-related charges and a reduction in non-interest related other
expenses in 2005.
asbestos claims and
litigation
the company believes that the property and casualty
insurance industry has suffered from court decisions and other trends that have
attempted to expand insurance coverage for asbestos claims far beyond the
intent of insurers and policyholders. while the company has experienced a
decrease in asbestos claims over the past two years, the company continues to
receive a significant number of asbestos claims from the companys
policyholders (which includes others seeking coverage under a policy),
including claims against the companys policyholders by individuals who do not
appear to be impaired by asbestos exposure. factors underlying these claim
filings include intensive advertising by lawyers seeking asbestos claimants,
the focus by plaintiffs on new and previously peripheral defendants and
entities seeking bankruptcy protection as a result of asbestos-related
liabilities. in addition to contributing to the overall number of claims,
bankruptcy proceedings may increase the volatility of asbestos-related losses
by initially delaying the reporting of claims and later by significantly
accelerating and increasing loss payments by insurers, including the company. bankruptcy
proceedings have also caused increased settlement demands against those
policyholders who are not in bankruptcy but that remain in the tort system. recently,
in many jurisdictions, those who allege very serious injury and who can present
credible medical evidence of their injuries are receiving priority trial
settings in the courts, while those who have not shown any credible disease
manifestation are having their hearing dates delayed or placed on an inactive
docket. this trend of prioritizing claims involving credible evidence of
injuries, along with the focus on new and previously peripheral defendants,
contributes to the loss and loss expense payments experienced by the company. in
addition, the companys asbestos-related loss and loss expense experience is
impacted by the exhaustion or unavailability due to insolvency of other
insurance potentially available to policyholders along with the insolvency or
bankruptcy of other defendants.
the company continues to be involved in coverage
litigation concerning a number of policyholders, some of whom have filed for
bankruptcy, including, among others, acands,inc., who in some instances
have asserted that all or a portion of their asbestos-related claims are not
subject to aggregate limits on coverage. (see partiitem 3, legal
proceedings). in these instances, policyholders also may assert that each
individual bodily injury claim should be treated as a separate occurrence under
the policy. it is difficult to predict whether these policyholders will be
successful on both issues. to the extent both issues are resolved in
policyholders favor and other company defenses are not successful, the companys
coverage obligations under the policies at issue would be materially increased
and bounded only by the applicable per-occurrence limits and the number of
asbestos bodily injury claims against the policyholders.
accordingly, although the
company has seen a moderation in the overall risk associated with these
lawsuits, it remains difficult to predict the ultimate cost of these claims.
many coverage disputes with policyholders are only
resolved through settlement agreements. because many policyholders make
exaggerated demands, it is difficult to predict the outcome of settlement
negotiations. settlements involving bankrupt policyholders may include extensive
releases which are favorable to the company but which could result in
settlements for larger amounts than originally anticipated. there also may be
instances where a court may not approve a proposed settlement, which may result
in additional litigation and potentially less beneficial outcomes for the
company. as in the past, the company will continue to pursue settlement
opportunities.
in addition, proceedings have been launched directly
against insurers, including the company, challenging insurers conduct in
respect of asbestos claims, and, as discussed below, claims by individuals
seeking damages arising from alleged asbestos-related bodily injuries. the
company anticipates the filing of other direct actions against insurers,
including the company, in the future. it is difficult to predict the outcome of
these proceedings, including whether the plaintiffs will be able to sustain
these actions against insurers based on novel legal theories of liability. the
company believes it has meritorious defenses to these claims and has received
favorable rulings in certain jurisdictions. additionally, travelers property
casualty corp. (tpc) has entered into settlement agreements, which have been
approved by the court in connection with the proceedings initiated by tpc in
the johns manville bankruptcy court. on
march29, 2006, the united states district court for the southern district
of new york substantially affirmed the bankruptcy courts orders, while
vacating that portion of the bankruptcy courts orders which required all
future direct actions against tpc to first be approved by the bankruptcy court
before proceeding in state or federal court. five appeals from the march29,
2006 ruling were filed in the u.s. court of appeals for the second circuit, and
tpc filed a cross-appeal. two appellants have voluntarily dismissed their
appeals and a motion to dismiss the cross-appeal was filed. additionally, tpc
appealed from a procedural order of the district court relating to the
timeliness of the cross-appeal. on january17, 2007, the second circuit
dismissed tpcs cross-appeal and denied tpcs appeal from the procedural order.
the three remaining principal appeals have been consolidated for disposition
and remain pending. it is not possible to predict how the appellate court will ruleon
the pending appeals. if the rulings of the district court are affirmed through
the appellate process, then tpc will have resolved substantially all of the
pending direct action claims against it. (also, see partiitem 3,
legal proceedings).
because each policyholder presents different liability
and coverage issues, the company generally reviews the exposure presented by
each policyholder annually on a policyholder-by-policyholder basis. in the
course of this review, the company considers, among other factors: available
insurance coverage, including the role of any umbrella or excess insurance the
company has issued to the policyholder; limits and deductibles; an analysis of
each policyholders potential liability; the jurisdictions involved; past and
anticipated future claim activity and loss development on pending claims; past
settlement values of similar claims; allocated claim adjustment expense;
potential role of other insurance; the role, if any, of non-asbestos
claims or potential non-asbestos claims in any resolution process; and
applicable coverage defenses or determinations, if any, including the
determination as to whether or not an asbestos claim is a products/completed
operation claim subject to an aggregate limit and the available coverage, if
any, for that claim. for those policyholders for which an estimate of the gross
ultimate exposure for indemnity and related claim adjustment expense is
determined, the company calculates, by each policy year, a ceded reinsurance
projection based on any applicable facultative and treaty reinsurance, past
ceded experience and reinsurance collections. conventional actuarial methods
are not utilized to establish asbestos reserves. the companys evaluations have
not resulted in any data from which a meaningful average asbestos defense or
indemnity payment may be determined.
the company also compares its historical gross and net
loss and expense paid experience, year-by-year, to assess any
emerging trends, fluctuations, or characteristics suggested by the aggregate
paid
activity. net asbestos
losses and expenses paid in 2006 were $469 million, compared with $399 million
in 2005. the $70 million net increase is primarily the result of lower
reinsurance billings in 2006. approximately 50% in 2006 and 42% in 2005 of
total net paid losses related to policyholders with whom the company previously
entered into settlement agreements limiting the companys liability. at december31,
2006, net asbestos reserves totaled $4.05 billion, compared with $4.36 billion
at december31, 2005.
the company recorded pre-tax asbestos reserve
additions of $155 million, $830 million and $928million in 2006, 2005 and
2004, respectively, pursuant to the completion of the companys annual
ground-up asbestos exposure review, which included an analysis of exposure and
claim payment patterns by policyholder category, as well as recent settlements,
policyholder bankruptcies, judicial rulings and legislative actions. approximately
half of the $155 million 2006 pretax reserve adjustment was due to an increase
in the projected defense costs for ten policyholders. additionally, $15 million
of the pretax reserve adjustment was attributable to a delay in the approval
and expected payment of the previously announced settlement with ppg industries,inc.
as part of the pittsburgh corning bankruptcy reorganization plan. the remainder
of the reserve adjustment was primarily due to continued litigation activity
against smaller, peripheral defendants. the asbestos reserve addition in 2005
resulted, in part, from higher than expected defense costs due to increased
trial activity for seriously impaired plaintiffs and prolonged litigation
before cases are settled or dismissed. the 2005 reserve addition also
considered the january2006 court decision voiding, on procedural grounds,
the previously rendered favorable arbitration decision in the ongoing acands
litigation (described in more detail in note 15). the asbestos reserve addition
recorded in 2004 primarily resulted from an increase in litigation costs and
activity surrounding peripheral defendants.
as in prior years, the 2006 annual review considered
active policyholders and litigation cases, including cases challenging the
applicability of aggregate limits on asbestos claims. developing payment trends
among policyholders in the home office and field office as well as assumed and
international categories were also analyzed. in 2006 the home office and field
office categories, which account for the vast majority of the number of
policyholders, experienced an overall reduction in new claim filings as well as
in gross indemnity and defense payments over prior years.
the company has
recently observed the following developments in the asbestos environment:
the
emergence of more stable payment trends for a greater proportion of
policyholders;
a
decrease in the number of new claims received;
a
decrease in the number of large asbestos exposures reflecting additional
settlement activity;
a
decrease in the number and volatility of asbestos-related bankruptcies; and
the
absence of new theories of liability or new classes of defendants.
while there remains uncertainty with respect to future
exposure from asbestos claims, the company believes that the factors noted
above have led to a reduction in the overall volatility associated with its
asbestos exposure.
as a result of these favorable changes in the asbestos
environment, and particular in the emergence of more stable payment patterns,
beginning in 2007 the company is now able to supplement the existing annual
in-depth process and the existing quarterly asbestos review process with
additional aggregate quarterly reserve analyses. these additional analyses
provide the company with an increased ability to detect and respond to emerging
trends, including reflecting any such trends, in its quarterly reserve
estimates.
the
company categorizes its asbestos reserves as follows:
numberof
policyholders
totalnetpaid
netasbestos
reserves
(atandfortheyearendeddecember31,$inmillions)
policyholders
with settlement agreements
$
$
$
$
1,357
home office,
field office and other
1,762
1,748
2,678
2,483
assumed
reinsurance and international
total
1,789
1,776
$
$
$
4,051
$
4,364
the policyholders with settlement agreements category
includes structured agreements, coverage in place arrangements and, with
respect to tpc, wellington accounts and the settlement of the statutory and
hawaii actions and the common law claims (for a fuller description of these
matters, see item 3legal proceedings) (collectively the direct action
settlement). reserves are based on the expected payout for each policyholder
under the applicable agreement. structured agreements are arrangements under
which policyholders and/or plaintiffs agree to fixed financial amounts to be
paid at scheduled times. in may2002, pittsburgh plate and glass company
(ppg) and the company, along with three dozen other insurers of ppg, agreed on
key terms to settle asbestos-related coverage litigation under insurance
policies issued to ppg. this settlement was to be incorporated into the plan of
reorganization (the plan) proposed as part of the pittsburgh corning (pc)
bankruptcy proceeding. pursuant to the proposed pc plan, pc along with
enumerated other companies (including ppg and corning) were to receive
protections afforded by section524(g)of the bankruptcy code from
certain asbestos-related bodily injury claims. in prior years the reserves
associated with this agreement were included in the structured settlement
category. on december21, 2006, the united states bankruptcy court for the
western district of pennsylvania declined to confirm the plan. confirmation of
the plan was one of the many conditions to the may2002 resolution with
ppg. various parties to the pc bankruptcy have filed motions for
reconsideration. it is not possible to predict how or when the bankruptcy court
will ruleon these motions. as a result of the december21, 2006
ruling, it is uncertain whether the terms of the may2002 settlement will
ever be fully satisfied and thus the company has removed the reserves
associated with this agreement from the structured settlement category and has
made a corresponding increase in its unallocated ibnr reserve. coverage in
place arrangements represent agreements with major policyholders on specified
amounts of coverage to be provided. payment obligations may be subject to
annual maximums and are only made when valid claims are presented. wellington
accounts refer to the 35 defendants that are parties to a 1985 agreement
settling certain disputes concerning insurance coverage for their asbestos
claims. many of the aspects of the wellington agreement are similar to those of
coverage in place arrangements in which the parties have agreed on specific
amounts of coverage and the terms under which the coverage can be accessed. as more
fully described in item 3, legal proceedings, tpc has entered into the direct
action settlement which is still subject to a number of contingencies. if those
contingencies are met, then tpc will pay up to $502 million, possibly in
calendar year 2007. one of the contingencies includes affirmance by all
appellate courts of the orders entered by the united states bankruptcy court
with respect to the direct action settlement. it is not possible to predict how
or when the appellate courts will ruleon the pending appeals.
home office, field office and other relates to
policyholders for which settlement agreements have not been reached, and also
includes unallocated ibnr. policyholders are identified for home office review
based upon, among other factors: aggregate ultimate expected payments in excess
of a specified threshold (currently $100,000), perceived level of exposure, number
of reported claims, products/completed operations and potential non-product
exposures, size of policyholder and geographic distribution of products or
services sold by the policyholder. in addition to ibnr amounts contained in the
reserves for home office and field office policyholders, the company has
established a reserve for further adverse
development related to
existing policyholders, new claims from policyholders reporting claims for the
first time and policyholders for which there is, or may be, litigation and
direct actions against the company.
assumed reinsurance exposure primarily consists of
reinsurance of excess coverage, including various pool participations.
international is exposed to u.s. asbestos liabilities through participations in
excess insurance policies, quota share and excess of loss reinsurance policies,
and retrocession policies, underwritten in the london insurance market. details
of exposures under the reinsurance and retrocession policies are identified
only when the company is advised by the retrocedant.
the
following table displays activity for asbestos losses and loss expenses and
reserves:
(atandfortheyearendeddecember31,inmillions)
beginning reserves:
direct
$
5,103
$
4,775
$
3,782
ceded
(739
)
(843
)
(805
)
net
4,364
3,932
2,977
reserves
acquired:
direct
ceded
(191
)
net
incurred losses
and loss expenses:
direct
ceded
(41
)
(3
)
(13
)
net
accretion of
discount:
direct
ceded
net
losses paid:
direct
ceded
(54
)
(107
)
(166
)
net
ending reserves:
direct
4,777
5,103
4,775
ceded
(726
)
(739
)
(843
)
net
$
4,051
$
4,364
$
3,932
see uncertainty
regarding adequacy of asbestos and environmental reserves.
environmental
claims and litigation
the company continues to receive claims from policyholders
who allege that they are liable for injury or damage arising out of their
alleged disposition of toxic substances. mostly, these claims are due to
various legislative as well as regulatory efforts aimed at environmental
remediation. for instance, the comprehensive environmental response,
compensation and liability act (cercla), enacted in 1980 and later modified,
enables private parties as well as federal and state governments to take action
with respect to releases and threatened releases of hazardous substances. this
federal statute permits the recovery of response costs from some liable parties
and may require liable parties to undertake their own remedial action.
liability under cercla may be joint and several with other responsible parties.
the company has been, and continues to be, involved in
litigation involving insurance coverage issues pertaining to environmental
claims. the company believes that some court decisions have interpreted the
insurance coverage to be broader than the original intent of the insurers and
policyholders. these decisions often pertain to insurance policies that were
issued by the company prior to the mid-1970s. these decisions continue to
be inconsistent and vary from jurisdiction to jurisdiction. environmental claims
when submitted rarely indicate the monetary amount being sought by the claimant
from the policyholder, and the company does not keep track of the monetary
amount being sought in those few claims which indicate a monetary amount.
at december31, 2006, approximately 81% of the
net environmental reserve (approximately $337million) was carried in a
bulk reserve and included unresolved environmental claims, incurred but not
reported environmental claims and the anticipated cost of coverage litigation
disputes relating to these claims. the bulk reserve the company carries is
established and adjusted based upon the aggregate volume of in-process
environmental claims and the companys experience in resolving those claims.
the balance, approximately 19% of the net environmental reserve (approximately
$81 million), consists of case reserves.
the resolution of environmental exposures by the
company generally occurs by settlement on a policyholder-by-policyholder basis
as opposed to a claim-by-claim basis. generally, the company strives to
extinguish any obligations it may have under any policy issued to the
policyholder for past, present and future environmental liabilities and
extinguish any pending coverage litigation dispute with the policyholder. this
form of settlement is commonly referred to as a buy-back of policies for
future environmental liability. in addition, many of the agreements have also
extinguished any insurance obligation which the company may have for other
claims, including but not limited to asbestos and other cumulative injury
claims. the company and its policyholders may also agree to settlements which
extinguish any future liability arising from known specified sites or claims.
provisions of these agreements also include appropriate indemnities and hold
harmless provisions to protect the company. the companys general purpose in
executing these agreements is to reduce the companys potential environmental
exposure and eliminate the risks presented by coverage litigation with the
policyholder and related costs.
in establishing environmental reserves, the company
evaluates the exposure presented by each policyholder and the anticipated cost
of resolution, if any. in the course of this analysis, the company considers
the probable liability, available coverage, relevant judicial interpretations
and historical value of similar exposures. in addition, the company considers
the many variables presented, such as the nature of the alleged activities of
the policyholder at each site; the allegations of environmental harm at each
site; the number of sites; the total number of potentially responsible parties
at each site; the nature of environmental harm and the corresponding remedy at
each site; the nature of government enforcement activities at each site; the
ownership and general use of each site; the overall nature of the insurance
relationship between the company and the policyholder, including the role of
any umbrella or excess insurance the company has issued to the policyholder;
the involvement of other insurers; the potential for other available coverage,
including the number of years of coverage; the role, if any, of
non-environmental claims or potential non-environmental claims in any
resolution process; and the applicable law in each jurisdiction. conventional
actuarial techniques are not used to estimate these reserves.
in its review of environmental reserves, the company
considers: the adequacy of reserves for past settlements; changing judicial and
legislative trends; the potential for policyholders with smaller exposures to
be named in new clean-up actions for both on- and off-site waste disposal
activities; the potential for adverse development; the potential for additional
new claims beyond previous expectations; and the potential higher costs for new
settlements.
the duration of the companys investigation and review
of these claims and the extent of time necessary to determine an appropriate
estimate, if any, of the value of the claim to the company vary
significantly and are
dependent upon a number of factors. these factors include, but are not limited
to, the cooperation of the policyholder in providing claim information, the
pace of underlying litigation or claim processes, the pace of coverage
litigation between the policyholder and the company and the willingness of the
policyholder and the company to negotiate, if appropriate, a resolution of any
dispute pertaining to these claims. because these factors vary from
claim-to-claim and policyholder-by-policyholder, the company cannot provide a
meaningful average of the duration of an environmental claim. however, based
upon the companys experience in resolving these claims, the duration may vary
from months to several years.
the company has continued to experience a decline in
the number of policyholders tendering claims for the first time. these
policyholders generally present smaller exposures, have fewer sites and are
lower tier defendants. further, regulatory agencies are utilizing risk-based
analysis and more efficient clean-up technologies. however, the company has
experienced higher than expected defense and settlement costs. these increases
have been driven in part by adverse judicial developments in certain states
regarding the availability of coverage for environmental claims. as a result of
these trends, the company increased environmental reserves by $120 million in
2006. in 2005, the company recorded a pretax charge of $30million,
primarily for declaratory judgment costs. in 2004, the company recorded a
pretax charge of $290 million due to revised estimates of costs related to
settlement initiatives. the increases to environmental reserves in each year
were net of reinsurance.
gross paid losses in 2006 and 2005 were $189 million
and $248 million, respectively. tpc entered into a significant settlement with
one policyholder in 2005. tpc executed an agreement with this policyholder
which resolved all past, present and future hazardous waste and pollution
property damage claims, and all related past and pending bodily injury claims. in
addition, tpc and this policyholder entered into a coverage-in-place agreement
which addressed the handling and resolution of all future hazardous waste and
pollution bodily injury claims. under the coverage-in-place agreement, tpc has
no defense obligation, and there is an overall cap with respect to any
indemnity obligation that might be owed. the first two payments related to this
settlement were made during 2005 and the final payment was made in the first
quarter of 2006.
the
following table displays activity for environmental losses and loss expenses
and reserves:
(atandfortheyearendeddecember31,inmillions)
beginning reserves:
direct
$
$
$
ceded
(69
)
(84
)
(41
)
net
reserves
acquired:
direct
ceded
(58
)
net
incurred losses
and loss expenses:
direct
ceded
(33
)
net
losses paid:
direct
ceded
(62
)
(2
)
(48
)
net
ending reserves:
direct
ceded
(69
)
(84
)
net
$
$
$
uncertainty
regarding adequacy of asbestos and environmental reserves
as a result of the processes and procedures described
above, management believes that the reserves carried for asbestos and
environmental claims at december31, 2006 are appropriately established
based upon known facts, current law and managements judgment. however, the
uncertainties surrounding the final resolution of these claims continue, and it
is difficult to determine the ultimate exposure for asbestos and environmental
claims and related litigation. as a result, these reserves are subject to
revision as new information becomes available and as claims develop. the
continuing uncertainties include, without limitation, the risks and lack of
predictability inherent in complex litigation, any impact from the bankruptcy protection
sought by various asbestos producers and other asbestos defendants, a further
increase or decrease in asbestos and environmental claims beyond that which is
anticipated, the role of any umbrella or excess policies the company has
issued, the resolution or adjudication of some disputes pertaining to the
amount of available coverage for asbestos and environmental claims in a manner
inconsistent with the companys previous assessment of these claims, the number
and outcome of direct actions against the company and future developments
pertaining to the companys ability to recover reinsurance for asbestos and
environmental claims. in addition, the companys asbestos-related claims and
claim adjustment expense experience has been impacted by the exhaustion or
unavailability due to insolvency of other insurance sources potentially
available to policyholders along with the insolvency or bankruptcy of other
defendants, although the company has noted a recent decrease in the number and
volatility of asbestos-related bankruptcies. it is also not possible to predict
changes in the legal and legislative environment and their impact on the future
development of asbestos and environmental claims. this development will be
affected by future court decisions and interpretations, as well as changes in
applicable legislation, including legislation related to asbestos reform. it is
also difficult to predict the ultimate outcome of large coverage disputes until
settlement negotiations near completion and significant legal questions are
resolved or, failing settlement, until the dispute is adjudicated. this is particularly
the
case with policyholders in
bankruptcy where negotiations often involve a large number of claimants and
other parties and require court approval to be effective. as part of its
continuing analysis of asbestos reserves, which includes an annual ground-up
review of asbestos policyholders, the company continues to study the
implications of these and other developments. the company completed its most
recent annual ground-up review during the third quarter of 2006. see partiitem
3, legal proceedings.
because of the
uncertainties set forth above, additional liabilities may arise for amounts in
excess of the current related reserves. in addition, the companys estimate of
claims and claim adjustment expenses may change. these additional liabilities
or increases in estimates, or a range of either, cannot now be reasonably
estimated and could result in income statement charges that could be material
to the companys operating results in future periods.
investment
portfolio
the companys invested assets at december31,
2006 totaled $72.27 billion, of which 94% was invested in fixed maturity and
short-term investments, 1% in equity securities, 1% in real estate and 4% in
other investments. because the primary purpose of the investment portfolio is
to fund future claims payments, the company employs a conservative investment
philosophy. the companys fixed maturity portfolio at december31, 2006
totaled $62.67 billion, comprising $62.46 billion of publicly traded fixed
maturities and $208 million of private fixed maturities. the weighted average
quality ratings of the companys publicly traded fixed maturity portfolio and
private fixed maturity portfolio at december31, 2006 were aa1 and a3,
respectively. included in the fixed maturity portfolio at that date was
approximately $1.78 billion of below investment grade securities. during 2006,
holdings of tax-exempt securities were increased to $35.63 billion to take
advantage of their relatively high credit quality and attractive after-tax
yields. the average effective duration of the fixed maturity portfolio,
including short-term investments, was 4.0 as of december31, 2006 (4.3
excluding short-term investments), compared with 3.9 as of december31,
2005 (4.3 excluding short-term investments).
the
following table sets forth the companys combined fixed maturity investment
portfolio classified by moodys investors service ratings:
(atdecember31,2006,inmillions)
carrying
value
percentoftotal
carryingvalue
quality rating:
aaa
$
41,578
66.3
%
aa
11,826
18.9
a
4,400
7.0
baa
3,085
4.9
total investment grade
60,889
97.1
non-investment grade
1,777
2.9
total fixed
maturity investments
$
62,666
100.0
%
the company makes investments in collateralized mortgage
obligations (cmos) that typically have high credit quality, offer good
liquidity, and are expected to provide an advantage in yield compared to u.s.
treasury securities. the companys investment strategy is to purchase cmo
tranches which offer the most favorable return given the risks involved. one significant
risk evaluated is prepayment sensitivity. while prepayment risk (either
shortening or lengthening of duration) and its effect on total return cannot be
fully controlled, particularly when interest rates move dramatically, the
investment process generally favors securities that control this risk within
expected interest rate ranges. the company does not purchase residual interests
in cmos.
at december31, 2006 and 2005, the company held
cmos classified as available for sale with a fair value of $3.56 billion and
$3.43 billion, respectively (excluding commercial mortgage-backed securities of
$1.07 billion and $1.16 billion, respectively). approximately 36% and 43% of
the companys cmo holdings are guaranteed by or fully collateralized by
securities issued by gnma, fnma or fhlmc at december31, 2006 and 2005,
respectively. in addition, the company held $4.36 billion and $4.83 billion of
gnma, fnma, fhlmc or fha mortgage-backed pass-through securities classified as
available for sale at december31, 2006 and 2005, respectively. virtually
all of these securities are rated aaa.
the companys real estate investments include
warehouses and office buildings and other commercial land and properties that
are directly owned. the companys other investments primarily comprise venture
capital, through direct ownership and limited partnerships, private equity
limited partnerships, joint ventures, other limited partnerships and trading
securities, which are subject to more volatility than the companys fixed
income investments, but historically have provided a higher return. at december31,
2006 and 2005, the carrying value of the companys other investments was $3.40
billion and $3.17 billion, respectively.
the
net unrealized investment gains (losses) that were included as a separate
component of accumulated other changes in equity from nonowner sources were as
follows:
(fortheyearendeddecember31,inmillions)
fixed maturities
$
$
$
1,252
equity securities
venture capital
other investments
(excluding venture capital)
(12
)
unrealized investment gains before tax
1,337
provision for
taxes
net unrealized
investment gains at end of year
$
$
$
net pretax unrealized investment gains at december31,
2006 increased by $195 million over year-end 2005, primarily concentrated in
the fixed maturity portfolio and in other investments carried at fair value. the
increase in net unrealized investment gains on fixed maturities was primarily
driven by the impact of declining market interest rates on tax-exempt
securities, which was partially offset by a slight increase in market interest rates
on taxable securities.
net pretax unrealized investment gains at december31,
2005 declined by $852 million from year-end 2004, primarily reflecting an $885
million pretax decrease in the net unrealized gain on fixed maturities that was
driven by an increase in market interest rates in 2005. partially offsetting
this decrease was a $78million increase in pretax unrealized gains on the
venture capital portfolio, which reflected favorable results from several of
the investments comprising this category, net of losses realized through
other-than-temporary impairments.
impairment
charges included in net realized investment gains (losses) were as follows:
(fortheyearendeddecember31,inmillions)
fixed maturities
$
$
$
equity securities
venture capital
other investments
(excluding venture capital)
total
$
$
$
for
the year ended december31, 2006, the company recognized the following
other-than-temporary impairments:
$7
million in the fixed maturities portfolio, consisting of $6 million resulting
from the potential to sell various holdings prior to a recovery in market
value, and $1 million related to credit risk associated with various issuers
deteriorated financial position.
$4
million in the equity portfolio when it became apparent that the cost basis of
those securities would not be recovered over the expected holding period.
$33
million in the venture capital portfolio on 16 holdings. four of the holdings
were impaired due to new financings on unfavorable terms. six holdings
experienced fundamental economic deterioration (characterized by less than
expected revenues or a fundamental change in product). four of the holdings
were impaired due to the impending sale, liquidation or shutdown of the entity.
two of the holdings were public securities whose cost basis was not anticipated
to be recovered over the expected holding period.
$4
million in its real estate and other investments (excluding venture capital).
the loss recorded was the result of one mortgage loan refinancing at less
favorable terms.
for
the year ended december31, 2005, the company recognized the following
other-than-temporary impairments:
$11
million in the fixed maturities portfolio related to various issuers due to
credit risk associated with the issuers deteriorated financial position.
$80
million in the venture capital portfolio on 22 holdings. two of the holdings
were impaired due to new financings on unfavorable terms. fifteen holdings
experienced fundamental economic deterioration (characterized by less than
expected revenues or a fundamental change in product). three of the holdings
were impaired due to the impending sale, liquidation or shutdown of the entity.
two of the holdings were public securities whose cost basis was not anticipated
to be recovered over the expected holding period.
$18
million in its real estate and other investments (excluding venture capital). the
losses recorded were the result of an equity partnership and a private stock
holding which both experienced fundamental deterioration in their financial position.
for
the year ended december31, 2004, the company recognized the following
other-than-temporary impairments:
$25
million in the fixed maturities portfolio related to various issuers due to
credit risk associated with the issuers deteriorated financial position.
$5
million in the equity portfolio when it became apparent that the cost basis of
those securities would not be recovered over the expected holding period.
$40
million in its venture capital portfolio on 16 holdings. three of the holdings
were impaired due to new financings on unfavorable terms. five holdings
experienced fundamental economic deterioration (characterized by less than
expected revenues or a fundamental change in product). eight of the holdings
were impaired due to the impending sale, liquidation or shutdown of the entity.
$10
million in its real estate and other investments (excluding venture capital).
the losses recorded were the result of falling rental rates and occupancies in
three of the companys real estate investment holdings.
the specific circumstances that led to the impairments
described above did not materially impact other individual investments held
during 2006, 2005 or 2004. the company continually evaluates current
developments in the market that have the potential to affect the valuation of
the companys investments.
at december31, 2006, the company had no fixed
maturities or equity securities available for sale for which fair value was
less than 80% of amortized cost or cost, respectively.
at december31, 2006, non-investment grade
securities comprised 2.9% of the companys fixed income investment portfolio.
included in those categories at december31, 2006 were securities in an
unrealized loss position that, in the aggregate, had an amortized cost of $599
million and a fair value of $581 million, resulting in a net pretax unrealized
investment loss of $18 million. these securities in an unrealized loss position
represented less than 1% of the total amortized cost and less than 1% of the
fair value of the fixed income portfolio at december31, 2006, and
accounted for 4% of the total pretax unrealized investment loss in the fixed
income portfolio.
following
are the pretax realized losses on investments sold during the year ended december31,2006:
(inmillions)
loss
fairvalue
fixed maturities
$
$
2,950
equity securities
other
total
$
$
3,020
resulting purchases and
sales of investments are based on cash requirements, the characteristics of the
insurance liabilities and current market conditions. the company identifies
investments to be sold to achieve its primary investment goals of assuring the
companys ability to meet policyholder obligations as well as to optimize
investment returns, given these obligations.
reinsurance
recoverables
ceded reinsurance involves credit risk, except with
regard to mandatory pools, and is generally subject to aggregate loss limits.
although the reinsurer is liable to the company to the extent of the
reinsurance ceded, the company remains liable as the direct insurer on all
risks reinsured. reinsurance recoverables are reported after reductions for
known insolvencies and after allowances for uncollectible amounts. the company
also holds collateral, including trust agreements, escrow funds and letters of
credit, under certain reinsurance agreements. the company monitors the
financial condition of reinsurers on an ongoing basis and reviews its
reinsurance arrangements periodically. reinsurers are selected based on their
financial condition, business practices and the price of their product
offerings.
the
following presents the companys top five reinsurer groups, by reinsurance
recoverables at december31, 2006 (in millions):
reinsurergroup
reinsurance
recoverables
a.m.bestratingofgroupspredominantreinsurer
swiss re group
$
1,478
a+
second
highest of 16 ratings
munich re group
1,125
a
third
highest of 16 ratings
berkshire
hathaway group
a++
highest
of 16 ratings
american
international group
a+
second
highest of 16 ratings
xl capital group
a+
second highest of 16
ratings
at december31, 2006,
$3.30 billion of reinsurance recoverables were collateralized by letters of
credit, trust agreements and escrow funds.
outlook
the companys strategic objective is to enhance its
position as a consistently profitable market leader and a cost-effective
provider of property and casualty insurance in the united states and in
selected international markets. a variety of factors continue to affect the
property and casualty insurance market and the companys core business outlook
for 2007, including competitive conditions throughout the majority of markets
served by the companys business segments, loss cost trends, asbestos- and
environmental-related developments and reinsurance and litigation costs.
the company expects property casualty market
conditions to continue to be competitive throughout 2007. relative to 2006,
within the business insurance segment, the company expects renewal price
changes to moderate and terms, conditions and insured values to improve for
exposures susceptible to catastrophe losses, such as coastal property and oil-
and gas-related exposures, while renewal price changes for non-catastrophe
related exposures are expected to be subject to modest declines. relative to
2006, within the financial, professional& international insurance
segment, the company expects renewal price changes to be subject to modest
declines. also relative to 2006, within the personal insurance segment, the
company expects renewal price changes in the automobile and homeowners markets
to remain relatively stable.
the company believes that the trend of increased
severity and frequency of storms experienced in 2005 and 2004, although not
evident in 2006, may continue in the foreseeable future. given the trend of
increased severity and frequency of storms, the company has reassessed its
definition of and exposure to coastal risks, as well as the impact on its
reinsurance program. accordingly, the company is reviewing the pricing,
exposures, return thresholds and terms and conditions it offers in coastal
areas. in part as a result of the severity and frequency of storms in 2005 and
2004, the companys cost of reinsurance has increased and the amount of
reinsurance coverage purchased has been reduced. the cost of reinsurance may
continue to increase and availability may continue to decline. to the extent
that the company is not able to reflect the potentially increased costs of
increased severity and frequency of storms or reinsurance in its pricing, the
companys results of operations may be adversely impacted. in particular, in
the personal insurance segment (and, to a lesser extent, in the business
insurance segments select accounts market), the company expects a delay in its
ability to increase pricing to offset these potentially increased costs since
the company cannot increase rates to the extent necessary without the approval
of the regulatory authorities of certain states. also, particularly in light of
the frequency and severity of storms in recent years, rating agencies have
increased their capital requirements for the company.
the extent of losses from a catastrophe is a function
of both the total amount of insured exposure in the area affected by the event
and the severity of the event. states have from time to time passed legislation
that has the effect of limiting the ability of insurers to manage catastrophe
risk, such as legislation prohibiting insurers from withdrawing from
catastrophe-prone areas. in addition, following catastrophes, there are
sometimes legislative initiatives and court decisions which seek to expand
insurance coverage for catastrophe claims beyond the original intent of the
policies. the companys ability or willingness to raise pricing, modify
underwriting terms or reduce exposure to certain geographies may be limited due
to considerations of public policy, the evolving political environment and/or
social responsibilities. the company may also choose to write business it might
not otherwise write for strategic purposes, such as improving access to other
underwriting opportunities.
with respect to non-catastrophe related claim
frequency, the industry has experienced unprecedented low levels over the last
several years, a trend that the company does not expect to change materially in
2007. the company expects severity trend, the other component of loss trend, to
continue to remain stable for non-catastrophe related claims. nevertheless,
with continued pressure on pricing, it is possible that loss ratios will
increase in certain parts of the companys business in 2007.
changes in the general interest rate environment
affect the returns available on new investments. while a rising interest rate
environment enhances the returns available on new fixed income investments, it
reduces the market value of existing fixed maturity investments and the
availability of gains on disposition. a decline in interest rates reduces the
returns available on new investments but increases the market value of existing
investments and the availability of realized investment gains on disposition.
in 2006, short-term interest rates and long-term taxable interest rates
continued to increase. additionally, yields available on new investments often
exceeded those yields on investments maturing in the investment portfolio. the
continuation of an upward trend in interest rates in 2007 would favorably
impact the average book yield of the companys fixed income holdings.
if the terrorism
risk insurance act of 2002 and terrorism risk insurance extension act of 2005 (the program) is
not renewed for periods after january1, 2008, the benefits of the program
will not be available to the company, and the company will be subject to losses
from acts of terrorism subject only to the terms and provisions of applicable
policies, including policies written in 2007 for which the period of coverage
extends into 2008. given the unpredictable frequency and severity of terrorism
losses, as well as the limited terrorism coverage in the companys own
reinsurance program, future losses from acts of terrorism, particularly those
involving nuclear, biological, chemical or radiological events, could be
material to the companys operating results, financial condition and/or
liquidity in future periods, particularly if the program is not renewed.
there are currently various state and federal
legislative and judicial proposals to require asbestos claimants to demonstrate
an asbestos illness. at this time it is not possible to predict the likelihood
or timing of such proposals being enacted or the effect if they are enacted.
the companys ongoing analysis of its asbestos reserves did not assume the
adoption of any asbestos reforms. for information about the outlook with
respect to asbestos-related claims and liabilities see asbestos claims and
litigation and uncertainty regarding adequacy of asbestos and environmental
reserves.
in recent years, the state insurance regulatory
framework has come under increased federal scrutiny, and some state
legislatures have considered or enacted laws that may alter or increase state
authority to regulate insurance companies and insurance holding companies.
further, the national association of insurance commissioners (naic) and state
insurance regulators continually reexamine existing laws and regulations,
specifically focusing on modifications to holding company regulations,
interpretations of existing laws and the development of new laws and
regulations. in addition, congress and some federal agencies from time to time
investigate the current condition of insurance regulation in the united states
to determine whether to impose federal or national regulation or to allow an
optional federal charter, similar to the option available to most banks. we
cannot predict with certainty the effect any proposed or future legislation or
naic initiatives may have on the conduct of our business. insurance laws or
regulations that are adopted or amended may be more restrictive than current
requirements or may result in higher costs. although the united states federal
government does not directly regulate the insurance business, changes in
federal legislation, regulation and/or administrative policies in several
areas, including changes in financial services regulation (e.g. the repeal of
the mccarran-ferguson act) and federal taxation, can significantly harm the
insurance industry, including us.
for a discussion of
potential risks that could impact the companys financial condition or results
of operations, see item 1arisk factors in this report.
liquidity and
capital resources
liquidity is a measure of
a companys ability to generate sufficient cash flows to meet the short- and
long-term cash requirements of its business operations. the liquidity
requirements of the companys business have been met primarily by funds
generated from operations, asset maturities and income received on investments.
the company also has access to liquidity through its shelf registration
statement
with the
securities and exchange commission and its $1 billion line of credit. cash
provided from these sources is used primarily for claims and claim adjustment
expense payments and operating expenses. the timing and amount of catastrophe
claims are inherently unpredictable. such claims increase liquidity
requirements. the timing and amount of reinsurance recoveries may be affected
by reinsurer solvency and reinsurance coverage disputes. additionally, the variability of
asbestos-related claim payments, as well as the volatility of potential
judgments and settlements arising out of litigation, may also result in
increased liquidity requirements. it is the opinion of the companys
management that the companys future liquidity needs will be adequately met
from all of the above sources.
operating
activities
net cash flows provided by operating activities of
continuing operations totaled $4.77 billion, $3.59 billion and $5.07 billion in
2006, 2005 and 2004, respectively. cash flows in 2006 reflected higher levels
of collected premiums and net investment income, lower claim payments on
catastrophe losses, as well as lower runoff claim payments. in addition, cash
flows from operations in 2006 benefited from significant 2006 reinsurance
recoveries related to 2005 hurricane losses, operations in runoff (primarily
gulf) and various commutation agreements. these factors were partially offset
by higher interest payments and an increase in tax payments resulting from
higher profitability. cash flows in 2005 reflected an increase in loss and loss
adjustment expense payments primarily related to the catastrophe losses
incurred during 2005 and 2004, and an increase in tax payments resulting from
higher profitability. cash flows in 2004 included $867 million in cash proceeds
received pursuant to the commutation of specific reinsurance agreements. cash
flows in 2004 also benefited from premium rate and volume increases. the
company utilized $11 million, $2.00 billion and $548 million of net operating
loss (nol) carryforwards during 2006, 2005 and 2004, respectively, thereby
reducing current regular tax payments by $4 million, $698 million and $192 million,
respectively.
net cash flows provided by
operating activities for all three years were negatively impacted by payments
for asbestos and environmental liabilities, as well as by payments for claims
related to the companys runoff operations.
investing
activities
net cash flows used in investing activities of
continuing operations totaled $3.06 billion, $5.44 billion and $4.65 billion in
2006, 2005 and 2004, respectively. fixed maturity securities accounted for the
majority of investment purchases in all three years.
the majority of funds available for investment are
deployed in a widely diversified portfolio of high quality, liquid
intermediate-term taxable u.s. government, corporate- and mortgage-backed bonds
and tax-exempt u.s. municipal bonds. the company closely monitors the duration
of its fixed maturity investments, and investment purchases and sales are
executed with the objective of having adequate funds available to satisfy the
companys insurance and debt obligations. the companys management of the
duration of the fixed income investment portfolio generally produces a duration
that exceeds the duration of the companys net insurance liabilities. the
average duration of fixed maturities and short-term securities was 4.0 at december31,
2006, compared with 3.9 at december31, 2005.
the company also invests much smaller amounts in
equity securities, venture capital, real estate, private equity limited
partnerships, joint ventures, other limited partnerships and trading
securities. these investment classes have the potential for higher returns but
also involve varying degrees of risk, including less stable rates of return and
less liquidity.
the primary goals of the companys asset liability
management process are to satisfy the insurance liabilities, manage the
interest rate risk embedded in those insurance liabilities, and maintain
sufficient liquidity to cover fluctuations in projected liability cash flows. generally,
the expected principal and
interest payments produced
by the companys fixed income portfolio adequately fund the estimated runoff of
the companys insurance reserves. although this is not an exact cash flow match
in each period, the substantial degree by which the market value of the fixed
income portfolio exceeds the present value of the net insurance liabilities,
plus the positive cash flow from newly sold policies and the large amount of
high quality liquid bonds provides assurance of the companys ability to fund
the payment of claims without having to sell illiquid assets or access credit
facilities.
sale
of subsidiary. the companys cash flows in 2005
included $2.40 billion of pretax proceeds (after underwriting fees and
transaction costs) from the divestiture of its equity interest in nuveen investments.
of this amount, $405 million was received directly by the companys insurance
subsidiaries, and the remainder was received directly by the holding company. of
the proceeds received directly by the holding company, $1.225 billion was
contributed to the capital of the companys insurance subsidiaries, with the
remainder available for general corporate purposes. holding company liquidity
levels were increased in 2005 through dividends received from the companys
operating subsidiaries, the retained proceeds from the nuveen investments
divestiture, the proceeds of $442 million from the issuance of common stock
(described below) and the issuance of $400 million of 5.50% senior notes.
at december31, 2006,
total cash, short-term invested assets and other readily marketable securities
aggregating $1.45 billion were held at the holding company level. the assets
held at the holding company, combined with other sources of funds available,
primarily additional dividends from operating subsidiaries, are considered
sufficient to meet the liquidity requirements of the company. these liquidity
requirements primarily include shareholder dividends and debt service.
financing activities
net cash flows used in financing activities of
continuing operations totaled $1.59 billion, $473 million and $516 million in
2006, 2005 and 2004, respectively. the 2006 total primarily reflected common
share repurchases and dividends to shareholders, partially offset by proceeds
from employee stock option exercises. in 2005, the total primarily reflected
the repayment of debt and dividends to shareholders, which were partially
offset by the issuance of common stock pursuant to the maturity of equity unit
forward contracts and the issuance of debt. dividends paid to shareholders were
the primary factor in cash used in financing activities in 2004.
debt
transactions. in june2006, the company
issued $400 million aggregate principal amount of 6.25% senior unsecured notes
due june20, 2016 and $400 million aggregate principal amount of 6.75%
senior unsecured notes due june20, 2036. the notes were issued at a
discount, resulting in effective interest rates of 6.30% and 6.86%,
respectively. net proceeds from the issuances (after original issue discount
and expenses) totaled approximately $786 million, which the company applied to
the redemption of approximately $593 million of 7.60% subordinated debentures
(described in more detail below), $150 million of 6.75% senior notes that
matured on november15, 2006 and $56 million of medium-term notes that
matured in the second half of the year.
in november2006, the company redeemed $593
million of 7.60% subordinated debentures originally issued in 2001 and due october15,
2050. the debentures were redeemable by the company on or after november13,
2006. in november2001, st. paul capital trust i, a business trust, issued
$575 million of preferred securities, the proceeds of which, along with $18
million in capital provided by the company, were used to purchase the
subordinated debentures issued by the company. upon the companys redemption of
its subordinated debentures in november2006, st. paul capital trust i in
turn used the proceeds to redeem its preferred securities. st. paul capital
trust i was then liquidated, and the company received an $18 million
distribution of capital. the company recorded a $42 million pretax gain on the
redemption of the subordinated debentures, representing the remaining
unamortized fair value adjustment
recorded at the merger
date. a portion of the proceeds from the june2006 debt issuances
described above was used to fund this redemption.
in 2005, the company repaid $815 million of its
outstanding debt, primarily comprised of the following: maturities of $238
million of 7.875% senior notes, $79 million of 7.125% senior notes, and $99
million of medium-term notes bearing interest rates ranging from 6.44% to
7.09%; and a net repayment of commercial paper borrowings of $395 million. in november2005,
the company issued $400 million of 5.50% senior notes maturing in december2015.
the majority of proceeds was used to fund the repayment of commercial paper
borrowings, described above, with the remainder used for general corporate
purposes.
in july2002, concurrent with the issuance of
17.8 million of spc common shares in a public offering, spc issued 8.9 million
equity units, each having a stated amount of $50, for gross consideration of
$442 million. each equity unit initially consisted of a forward purchase
contract for the companys common stock, which matured in august2005, and
an unsecured $50 senior note of the company (maturing in 2007). total annual
distributions on the equity units were at the rate of 9.00%, consisting of
interest on the note at a rate of 5.25% and fee payments under the forward
contract of 3.75%. holders of the equity units had the opportunity to
participate in a required remarketing of the senior note component. the initial
remarketing date was may11, 2005. on that date, the notes were
successfully remarketed, and the interest rate on the notes was reset to 5.01%,
from 5.25%, effective may16, 2005. the remarketed notes mature on august16,
2007. the forward purchase contract required the investor to purchase, for $50,
a variable number of shares of the companys common stock on the settlement
date of august16, 2005. the number of shares purchased was determined
based on a formula that considered the average closing price of the companys
common stock on each of 20 consecutive trading days ending on the third trading
day immediately preceding the settlement date, in relation to the $24.20 per
share price of common stock at the time of the offering. on the august16,
2005 settlement date, the company issued 15.2 million common shares and
received total proceeds of $442 million.
in january2007, the company redeemed its 8.47%,
$81 million subordinated debentures due january10, 2027. the redemption
was funded internally. an additional $1.02 billion of the companys outstanding
debt at december31, 2006 will mature at various times during 2007. the
company plans to refinance these maturities during 2007.
share
repurchases. on may2, 2006, the companys
board of directors authorized a program to repurchase up to $2 billion of the companys
common stock. under this program, repurchasesmay be madefrom time
to time in the open market, in accordance with rule10b-18 under the
securities exchange act of 1934, pursuant to pre-set trading plans meeting the
requirements of rule10b5-1 under the securities exchange act of
1934, in private transactions or otherwise. this program does not have a stated
expiration date. the timing and actual number of shares to be repurchased in
the future will depend on a variety of factors, including corporate and
regulatory requirements, price, catastrophe losses and other market conditions.
during 2006, the company repurchased 22.8 million common shares under the
program for a total cost of approximately $1.12 billion. the average cost per
share repurchased in 2006 was $49.20.
in 2006, 2005 and 2004, the company acquired 1.2
million, 0.8 million and 0.4 million shares, respectively, of common stock from
employees as treasury stock primarily to cover payroll withholding taxes
related to the vesting of restricted stock awards and exercises of stock
options.
dividends. dividends paid to shareholders totaled $702 million,
$628 million and $642 million in 2006, 2005 and 2004, respectively. on february7,
2007, the companys board of directors declared a quarterly dividend of $0.26
per share, payable march30, 2007 to shareholders of record on march9,
2007. the declaration and payment of future dividends to holders of the companys
common stock will be at the discretion of the companys board of directors and
will depend upon many factors, including the
companys financial
condition, earnings, capital requirements of the companys operating
subsidiaries, legal requirements, regulatory constraints and other factors as
the board of directors deems relevant. dividends would be paid by the company
only if declared by its board of directors out of funds legally available,
subject to any other restrictions that may be applicable to the company.
capital resources
capital
resources reflect the overall financial strength of the company and its ability
to borrow funds at competitive rates and raise new capital to meet its needs. the
following table summarizes the components of the companys capital structure at
december31, 2006 and 2005.
(atdecember31,inmillions)
debt:
short-term
$
1,114
$
long-term
4,588
5,393
net unamortized fair value adjustments and debt
issuance costs
total debt
5,760
5,850
preferred
shareholders equity
common
shareholders equity:
common stock and retained earnings, less treasury
stock
24,554
21,799
accumulated other changes in equity from nonowner
sources
total shareholders equity
25,135
22,303
total
capitalization
$
30,895
$
28,153
the increase in shareholders equity in 2006 reflected
the companys strong net income for the year, partially offset by the impact of
common share repurchases and dividends to shareholders.
line
of credit agreement. the company maintains an
$800 million commercial paper program with back-up liquidity consisting of a
bank credit agreement. in june2005, the company entered into a $1.0
billion, five-year revolving credit agreement with a syndicate of financial
institutions. pursuant to covenants in
the credit agreement, the company must maintain an excess of consolidated net
worth over goodwill and other intangible assets of not less than $10 billion at
all times. the company must also maintain a ratio of total consolidated
debt to the sum of total consolidated debt plus consolidated net worth of not
greater than 0.40 to 1.00. in addition, the credit agreement contains other
customary restrictive covenants as well as certain customary events of default,
including with respect to a change in control. at december31, 2006, the
company was in compliance with these covenants and all other covenants related
to its respective debt instruments outstanding. pursuant to the terms of the
credit agreement, the company has an option to increase the credit available
under the facility, no more than once a year, up to a maximum facility amount
of $1.5 billion, subject to the satisfaction of a ratings requirement and
certain other conditions. there was no amount outstanding under the credit
agreement as of december31, 2006.
shelf
registration. in december2005, the company
filed with the securities and exchange commission a shelf registration
statement for the potential offering and sale of securities. the company may
offer these securities from time to time at prices and on other terms to be
determined at the time of offering. during 2006, the company issued $800
million of senior debt (as described above) under this shelf registration
statement.
share repurchase capacity. at december31, 2006, the company had $879
million of capacity remaining under the original $2 billion share repurchase
program approved by the board of directors in 2006. in january2007, the
companys board of directors authorized a $3 billion increase to the program,
which the company currently expects to fully utilize by the first quarter of
2009, subject to the factors listed in the share repurchases section above.
contractual
obligations
the following table summarizes, as of december31,
2006, the companys future payments under contractual obligations and estimated
claims and claims related payments. the table excludes short-term obligations
and includes only liabilities at december31, 2006 that are expected to be
settled in cash.
the table below includes the amount and estimated
future timing of claims and claim related payments. the amounts do not
represent the exact liability, but instead represent estimates, generally
utilizing actuarial projections techniques, at a given accounting date. these
estimates include expectations of what the ultimate settlement and
administration of claims will cost based on the companys assessment of facts
and circumstances then known, review of historical settlement patterns,
estimates of trends in claims severity, frequency, legal theories of liability
and other factors. variables in the reserve estimation process can be affected
by both internal and external events, such as changes in claims handling
procedures, economic inflation, legal trends and legislative changes. many of
these items are not directly quantifiable, particularly on a prospective basis.
additionally, there may be significant reporting lags between the occurrence of
the policyholder event and the time it is actually reported to the insurer. the
future cash flows related to the items contained in the table below required
estimation of both amount (including severity considerations) and timing.
amount and timing are frequently estimated separately. an estimation of both
amount and timing of future cash flows related to claims and claim related
payments is generally reliable only in the aggregate with some unavoidable
estimation uncertainty.
the
contractual obligations related to debt, operating leases, purchase
obligations, long-term unfunded investment commitments and estimated claims and
claims related payments (gross of the estimated reinsurance recoveries), at
december31, 2006 were as follows:
paymentsduebyperiod
(inmillions)
total
less
than
1year
1-3
years
3-5
years
after5
years
debt(1)
medium term notes
$
$
$
$
$
convertible notes
senior notes
3,992
2,400
capital trusts
zero coupon convertible notes
private placement notes
total debt principal
5,615
1,098
3,547
interest
4,356
3,159
total long-term debt obligations
9,971
1,394
1,170
6,706
operating leases(2)
purchase
obligations
information systems administration and maintenance
commitments(3)
reinsurance brokerage commitment(4)
other purchase commitments(5)
total purchase obligations
long-term unfunded investment commitments(6)
1,392
estimated
claims and claims related payments
claims and claim adjustment expenses(7)
60,357
16,879
18,803
8,752
15,923
claims from large deductible policies(8)
loss-based assessments(9)
reinsurance contracts accounted for as deposits(10)
payout from ceded funds withheld(11)
total estimated claims and claims related
payments
61,254
17,096
19,198
8,782
16,178
total
$
73,856
$
19,121
$
21,286
$
10,035
$
23,414
(1) see note 7 of the notes
to the companys consolidated financial statements for a further discussion.
because the amounts reported in the foregoing table include principal and
interest, the total long-term obligations will not agree with the amounts
reported in note 7.
(2) represents agreements
entered into in the ordinary course of business to lease office space,
equipment and furniture.
(3) includes agreements with
vendors to purchase system software administration and maintenance services.
(4) in connection with the
sale of its insurance brokerage operations, the company committed to acquire
brokerage services from the buyer through 2012. see note 15.
(5) includes commitments to
vendors entered into in the ordinary course of business for goods and services
including office supplies, archival services, etc.
(6) represents estimated
timing for fulfilling unfunded commitments for investments in real estate
partnerships, private equities and hedge funds.
(7) the amounts in claims
and claim adjustment expenses in the table above represent the estimated
timing of future payments for both reported and unreported claims incurred and
related claim adjustment expenses, gross of reinsurance recoverables.
the company has entered into reinsurance agreements to
protect itself from potential losses in excess of the amount it is prepared to
accept as described in note 4 the notes to financial statements.
in order to qualify for reinsurance accounting, a
reinsurance agreement must indemnify the insurer from insurance risk, i.e., the
agreement must transfer amount and timing risk. since the timing and amount of
cash inflows from such reinsurance agreements are directly related to the
underlying payment of claims and claim adjustment expenses by the insurer,
reinsurance receivables are recognized in a manner consistent with the
liabilities (the estimated liability for claims and claims adjustment expense)
relating to the underlying reinsured contracts. the presence of any feature
that can delay timely reimbursement of claims by a reinsurer results in the
reinsurance contract being accounted for as a deposit rather than reinsurance.
(see below.) the assumptions used in estimating the amount and timing of the
reinsurance receivables are consistent with those used in estimating the amount
and timing of the related liabilities.
reinsurance agreements that do not transfer both
amount and timing risk are accounted for as deposits and included in reinsurance
contracts accounted for as deposits in the table above.
the estimated future cash inflows from the companys
reinsurance contracts that qualify for reinsurance accounting are as follows:
(inmillions)
total
lessthan1
year
1-3
years
3-5
years
after5
years
reinsurance
receivables
$
16,618
$
4,592
$
5,088
$
2,385
$
4,553
the company manages its business and evaluates its
liabilities for claims and claim adjustment expense on a net of reinsurance
basis. the estimated cash flows on a net of reinsurance basis are as follows:
(inmillions)
total
lessthan1
year
1-3
years
3-5
years
after5
years
claims
and claim adjustment expense, net
$
43,739
$
12,287
$
13,715
$
6,367
$
11,370
for business underwritten by non-u.s. operations,
future cash flows related to reported and unreported claims incurred and
related claim adjustment expenses were translated at the spot rate on december31,
2006.
the amounts
reported in the table above and in the table of reinsurance receivables above
are presented on a nominal basis and have not been adjusted to reflect the time
value of money. accordingly, the amounts above will differ from the companys
balance sheet to the extent that the liability for claims and claim adjustment
expenses and the related reinsurance receivables have been discounted in the
balance sheet. (see note 1 of the financial statements.)
(8) workers compensation
large deductible policies provide third party coverage in which the company
typically is responsible for paying the entire loss under such policies and
then seeks reimbursement from the insured for the deductible amount. claims
from large deductible policies represent the estimated future payment for
claims and claim related expenses below the deductible amount, net of the
estimated recovery of the deductible. the liability and the related deductible
receivable for unpaid claims are presented in the consolidated balance sheet as
contractholder payables and
contractholder
receivables, respectively. most deductibles for such policies are paid
directly from the policyholders escrow which is periodically replenished by
the policyholder. the payment of the loss amounts above the deductible are
reported within claims and claim adjustment expenses in the above table.
because the timing of the collection of the deductible (contractholder
receivables) occurs shortly after the payment of the deductible to a claimant
(contractholder payables), these cash flows offset each other in the table.
the
estimated timing of the payment of the contractholder payables and the
collection of contractholder receivables for workers compensation policies is
presented below:
(inmillions)
total
lessthan1
year
1-3
years
3-5
years
after5
years
contractholder
payables/ receivables
$
5,023
$
1,274
$
1,425
$
$
1,605
(9) the amounts in loss-based assessments relate to estimated future
payments of second-injury fund assessments which would result from payment of
current claim liabilities. second injury funds cover the cost of any additional
benefits for aggravation of a pre-existing condition. for loss-based assessments,
the cost is shared by the insurance industry and self-insureds, funded through
assessments to insurance companies and self-insureds based on losses. amounts
relating to second-injury fund assessments are included in other
liabilities in the consolidated balance sheet.
(10) the amounts in reinsurance contracts accounted for as deposits
represent estimated future nominal payments for reinsurance agreements that are
accounted for as deposits. amounts payable under deposit agreements are included
in other liabilities in the consolidated balance sheet. the amounts reported
in the table are presented on a nominal basis and have not been adjusted to
reflect the time value of money. accordingly, the amounts above will differ
from the companys balance sheet to the extent that deposit values in the
balance sheet have been discounted using deposit accounting.
(11) the amounts in payouts from ceded funds withheld represent
estimated payments for losses and return of funds held related to certain reinsurance
arrangements whereby the company holds a portion of the premium due to the
reinsurer and is allowed to pay claims from the amounts held.
the above table does not
include an analysis of liabilities reported for structured settlements for
which the company has purchased annuities and remains contingently liable in
the event of default by the company issuing the annuity. the company is not
reasonably likely to incur future payment obligations under such agreements. in
addition, the company is not required to make any contributions to its
qualified pension plan in 2006 and does not have a best estimate of
contributions expected to be paid to the qualified pension plan. accordingly,
any future contributions are not included in the foregoing table.
dividend
availability
the companys principal insurance subsidiaries are
domiciled in the states of connecticut and minnesota. the insurance holding
company laws of both states applicable to the companys subsidiaries requires
notice to, and approval by, the state insurance commissioner for the
declaration or payment of any dividend, that together with other distributions
made within the preceding twelve months, exceeds the greater of 10% of the
insurers capital and surplus as of the preceding december31, or the
insurers net income for the twelve-month period ending the preceding december31,
in each case determined in accordance with statutory accounting practices and
by state regulation. this declaration or payment is further limited by adjusted
unassigned surplus, as determined in accordance with statutory accounting
practices.
the insurance holding
company laws of other states in which the companys subsidiaries are domiciled
generally contain similar, although in some instances somewhat more
restrictive, limitations on the payment of dividends. a maximum of $3.07
billion is available by the end of 2007 for such dividends without prior
approval of the connecticut insurance department for connecticut-domiciled
subsidiaries and the minnesota department of commerce for minnesota-domiciled
subsidiaries. the company received $1.16 billion of dividends from its
insurance subsidiaries in 2006.
risk-based capital
the naic adopted rbc
requirements for property casualty companies to be used as minimum capital
requirements by the naic and states to identify companies that merit further
regulatory action. the formulas have not been designed to differentiate among
adequately capitalized companies that operate with levels of capital higher
than rbc requirements. therefore, it is inappropriate and ineffective to use
the formulas to rate or to rank these companies. at december31, 2006, all
of the companys insurance subsidiaries had adjusted capital in excess of
amounts requiring any company or regulatory action.
off-balance sheet
arrangements
the company has entered
into certain contingent obligations for guarantees related to agency loans and
letters of credit, issuance of debt securities, third party loans related to
venture capital investments and various indemnifications related to the sale of
business entities to third parties. see note 15 to the companys consolidated
financial statements. the company does not expect these arrangements to have a
material effect on the companys financial condition, changes in financial condition,
revenues and expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures
or capital resources.
critical accounting
estimates
the company considers its
most significant accounting estimates to be those applied to claim and claim
adjustment expense reserves and related reinsurance recoverables, investment
impairments and goodwill impairments.
claim and claim
adjustment expense reserves
claim and claim adjustment expense reserves (loss
reserves) represent managements estimate of ultimate unpaid costs of losses
and loss adjustment expenses for claims that have been reported and claims that
have been incurred but not yet reported. loss reserves do not represent an
exact calculation of liability, but instead represent management estimates,
generally utilizing actuarial expertise and projection techniques, at a given
accounting date. these loss reserve estimates are expectations of what the
ultimate settlement and administration of claims will cost upon final
resolution in the future, based on the companys assessment of facts and
circumstances then known, review of historical settlement patterns, estimates
of trends in claims severity and frequency, expected interpretations of legal
theories of liability and other factors. in establishing reserves, the company
also takes into account estimated recoveries, reinsurance, salvage and
subrogation. the reserves are reviewed regularly by a qualified actuary
employed by the company.
the process of estimating loss reserves involves a
high degree of judgment and is subject to a number of variables. these
variables can be affected by both internal and external events, such as changes
in claims handling procedures, changes in individuals involved in the reserve
estimation process, economic inflation, legal trends and legislative changes,
among others. the impact of many of these items on ultimate costs for loss and
loss adjustment expenses is difficult to estimate. loss reserve estimation
difficulties also differ significantly by product line due to differences in claim
complexity, the volume of claims, the potential
severity of individual
claims, the determination of occurrence date for a claim and reporting lags
(the time between the occurrence of the policyholder event and when it is
actually reported to the insurer). informed judgment is applied throughout the
process. the company continually refines its loss reserve estimates in a
regular ongoing process as historical loss experience develops and additional
claims are reported and settled. the company rigorously attempts to consider
all significant facts and circumstances known at the time loss reserves are
established. due to the inherent uncertainty underlying loss reserve estimates
including but not limited to the future settlement environment, final resolution
of the estimated liability will be different from that anticipated at the
reporting date. therefore, actual paid losses in the future may yield a
materially different amount than currently reservedfavorable or unfavorable.
because establishment of loss reserves is an
inherently uncertain process involving estimates, currently established
reserves may change. the company reflects adjustments to reserves in the
results of operations in the period the estimates are changed.
there are also risks which impact the estimation of
ultimate costs for catastrophes. for example, the estimation of reserves
related to hurricanes can be affected by the inability by the company and its
insureds to access portions of the impacted areas, the complexity of factors
contributing to the losses, the legal and regulatory uncertainties and the
nature of the information available to establish the reserves. complex factors
include, but are not limited to, determining whether damage was caused by
flooding versus wind; evaluating general liability and pollution exposures;
estimating additional living expenses; and estimating the impact of demand
surge, infrastructure disruption, fraud, the effect of mold damage and business
interruption costs and reinsurance collectibility. the timing of a catastrophes
occurrence, such as at or near the end of a reporting period, can also affect
the information available to us in estimating reserves for that reporting
period. the estimates related to catastrophes are adjusted as actual claims
emerge.
a portion of the companys loss reserves are for
asbestos and environmental claims and related litigation which totaled $4.47
billion at december31, 2006. while the ongoing study of asbestos claims
and associated liabilities and of environmental claims considers the
inconsistencies of court decisions as to coverage, plaintiffs expanded
theories of liability and the risks inherent in complex litigation and other
uncertainties, in the opinion of the companys management, it is possible that
the outcome of the continued uncertainties regarding these claims could result
in liability in future periods that differs from current reserves by an amount
that could be material to the companys future operating results. see the
preceding discussion of asbestos claims and litigation and environmental
claims and litigation.
gross
claims and claim adjustment expense reserves by product line were as follows:
(atdecember31,inmillions)
case
ibnr
total
case
ibnr
total
general liability
$
7,555
$
12,414
$
19,969
$
8,198
$
12,251
$
20,449
property
1,612
2,590
1,987
1,050
3,037
commercial
multi-peril
1,940
2,693
4,633
2,448
2,901
5,349
commercial
automobile
2,573
1,801
4,374
2,792
1,885
4,677
workers
compensation
9,142
6,337
15,479
8,816
6,374
15,190
fidelity and
surety
1,035
1,873
1,240
1,913
personal
automobile
1,505
1,092
2,597
1,470
1,138
2,608
homeowners and
personalother
1,187
1,696
international and
other
3,296
3,204
6,500
3,033
3,055
6,088
property-casualty
29,139
30,063
59,202
30,693
30,314
61,007
accident and
health
claims
and claim adjustment expensereserves
$
29,215
$
30,073
$
59,288
$
30,767
$
30,323
$
61,090
the $1.80 billion decline in gross claim and claim
adjustment expense reserves in 2006 primarily reflected payments related to
prior year hurricane losses, claim and claim adjustment expense payments from
runoff operations and favorable prior year reserve development, primarily in
the personal insurance segment, partially offset by the impact of reserves
acquired in the ritc transaction described in note 1.
asbestos and environmental
reserves are included in the general liability, commercial multi-peril lines
and international and other lines in the summary table. asbestos and
environmental reserves are discussed separately; see asbestos claims and
litigation, environmental claims and litigation and uncertainty regarding
adequacy of asbestos and environmental reserves.
general discussion
the process for estimating the liabilities for claim
and claim expenses begins with the collection and analysis of claim data. data
on individual reported claims, both current and historical, including paid
amounts and individual claim adjuster estimates, are grouped by common
characteristics (components) and evaluated by actuaries in their analyses of
ultimate claim liabilities by product line. such data is occasionally
supplemented with external data as available and when appropriate. the process
of analyzing reserves for a component is undertaken on a regular basis,
generally quarterly, in light of continually updated information.
multiple estimation methods are available for the
analysis of ultimate claim liabilities. each estimation method has its own set
of assumption variables and its own advantages and disadvantages, with no
single estimation method being better than the others in all situations and no
one set of assumption variables being meaningful for all product line
components. the relative strengths and weaknesses of the particular estimation
methods when applied to a particular group of claims can also change over time.
therefore, the actual choice of estimation method(s)can change with each
evaluation. the estimation method(s)chosen are those that are believed to
produce the most reliable indication at that particular evaluation date for the
claim liabilities being evaluated.
in most cases, multiple estimation methods will be
valid for the particular facts and circumstances of the claim liabilities being
evaluated. this will result in a range of reasonable estimates for any particular
claim liability. the company uses such range analyses to back test whether
previously established estimates for reserves at the reporting segments are
reasonable, given subsequent information. reported values found to be closer to
the endpoints of a range of reasonable estimates are subject to further
detailed reviews. these reviews may substantiate the validity of managements
recorded estimate or lead to a change in the reported estimate.
the exact boundary points of these ranges are more
qualitative than quantitative in nature, as no clear line of demarcation exists
to determine when the set of underlying assumptions for an estimation method
switches from being reasonable to unreasonable. as a result, the company does
not believe that the endpoints of these ranges are or would be comparable
across companies. in addition, potential interactions among the different
estimation assumptions for different product lines make the aggregation of
individual ranges a highly judgmental and inexact process.
property casualty insurance policies are either
written on a claims made or on an occurrence basis. policies written on a
claims made basis require that claims be reported during the policy period.
policies that are written on an occurrence basis require that the insured
demonstrate that a loss occurred in the policy period, even if the insured
reports the loss many years later.
most general liability policies are written on an
occurrence basis. these policies are subject to substantial loss development
over time as facts and circumstances change in the years following the policy
issuance. the use of the occurrence form accounts for much of the reserve
development in asbestos and environmental exposures, and it is also used to
provide coverage for construction general liability,
including construction
defect. occurrence based forms of insurance for general liability exposures
require substantial projection of various trends, including future inflation
and judicial interpretations and societal litigation dynamics, among others.
a basic premise in most actuarial analyses is that
past patterns demonstrated in the data will repeat themselves in the future,
absent a material change in the associated risk factors discussed below. to the
extent a material change affecting the ultimate claim liability is known, such
change is quantified to the extent possible through an analysis of internal
company and, if available and when appropriate, external data. such a
measurement is specific to the facts and circumstances of the particular claim
portfolio and the known change being evaluated. significant structural changes
to the available data, product mix or organization can materially impact the
reserve estimation process.
informed management judgment is applied throughout the
reserving process. this includes the application, on a consistent basis over
time, of various individual experiences and expertise to multiple sets of data
and analyses. in addition to actuaries, experts involved with the reserving
process also include underwriting and claims personnel and lawyers, as well as
other company management. therefore, management may have to consider varying
individual viewpoints as part of its estimation of loss reserves. it is also
likely that during periods of significant change, such as a merger, consistent
application of informed judgment becomes even more complicated and difficult.
the variables discussed above in this general
discussion have different impacts on reserve estimation uncertainty for a given
product line, depending on the length of the claim tail, the reporting lag, the
impact of individual claims and the complexity of the claim process for a given
product line.
product lines are generally classifiable as either
long tail or short tail, based on the average length of time between the event
triggering claims under a policy and the final resolution of those claims.
short tail claims are reported and settled quickly, resulting in less
estimation variability. the longer the time before final claim resolution, the
greater the exposure to estimation risks and hence the greater the estimation
uncertainty.
a major component of the claim tail is the reporting
lag. the reporting lag, which is the time between the event triggering a claim
and the reporting of the claim to the insurer, makes estimating ibnr inherently
more uncertain. in addition, the greater the reporting lag the greater the
proportion of ibnr claims to the total claim liability for the product line.
writing new products with material reporting lags can result in adding several
years worth of ibnr claim exposure before the reporting lag exposure becomes
clearly observable, thereby increasing the risk associated with pricing and
reserving such products. the most extreme example of claim liabilities with
long reporting lags are asbestos claims.
for some lines, the impact of large individual claims
can be material to the analysis. these lines are generally referred to as being
low frequency/high severity, while lines without this large claim
sensitivity are referred to as high frequency/low severity. estimates of
claim liabilities for low frequency/high severity lines can be sensitive to the
impact of a small number of potentially large claims. as a result, the role of
judgment is much greater for these reserve estimates. in contrast, high
frequency/low severity lines tend to have much greater spread of estimation
risk, such that the impact of individual claims are relatively minor and the
range of reasonable reserve estimates is narrower and more stable.
claim complexity can also greatly affect the
estimation process by impacting the number of assumptions needed to produce the
estimate, the potential stability of the underlying data and claim process and
the ability to gain an understanding of the data. product lines with greater
claim complexity, such as for certain surety and construction exposures, have
inherently greater estimation uncertainty.
actuaries have to exercise a considerable degree of judgment
in the evaluation of all these factors in their analysis of reserves. the human
element in the application of actuarial judgment is unavoidable when
faced with material
uncertainty. different actuaries may choose different assumptions when faced
with such uncertainty, based on their individual backgrounds, professional
experiences and areas of focus. hence, the estimate selected by the various
actuaries may differ materially from each other.
lastly, significant
structural changes to the available data, product mix or organization can also
materially impact the reserve estimation process. the merger of tpc and spc
resulted in the exposure of each others actuaries and claim departments to
different products, data histories, analysis methodologies, claim settlement
experts, and more robust data when viewed on a combined basis. this impacted
the range of estimates produced by the companys actuaries, as they reacted to
new data, approaches, and sources of expertise to draw upon. it also resulted
in additional levels of uncertainty, as past trends (that were a function of
past products, past claim handling procedures, past claim departments, and past
legal and other experts) may not repeat themselves, as those items affecting
the trends change or evolve due to the merger. this also increased the
potential for material variation in estimates, as experts can have differing
views as to the impact of these frequently evolutionary changes. events such as
mergers increase the inherent uncertainty of reserve estimates for a period of
time, until stable trends reestablish themselves within the new organization.
risk factors
the major causes of material uncertainty (risk
factors) generally will vary for each product line, as well as for each
separately analyzed component of the product line. in a few cases, such risk
factors are explicit assumptions of the estimation method and in most cases,
they are implicit. for example, a method may explicitly assume that a certain
percentage of claims will close each year, but will implicitly assume that the
legal interpretation of existing contract language will remain unchanged.
actual results will likely vary from expectations for each of these
assumptions, resulting in an ultimate claim liability that is different from
that being estimated currently.
some risk factors will affect more than one product
line. examples include changes in claim department practices, changes in
settlement patterns, regulatory and legislative actions, court actions,
timeliness of claim reporting, state mix of claimants, and degree of claimant
fraud. the extent of the impact of a risk factor will also vary by components
within a product line. individual risk factors are also subject to interactions
with other risk factors within product line components.
the effect of a particular risk factor on estimates of
claim liabilities cannot be isolated in most cases. for example, estimates of
potential claim settlements may be impacted by the risk associated with
potential court rulings, but the final settlement agreement typically does not
delineate how much of the settled amount is due to this and other factors.
the evaluation of data is also subject to distortion
from extreme events or structural shifts, sometimes in unanticipated ways. for
example, the timing of claims payments in one geographic region will be
impacted if claim adjusters are temporarily reassigned from that region to help
settle catastrophe claims in another region.
while some changes in the claim environment are sudden
in nature (such as a new court ruling affecting the interpretation of all
contracts in that jurisdiction), others are more evolutionary. evolutionary
changes can occur when multiple factors affect final claim values, with the
uncertainty surrounding each factor being resolved separately, in step-wise
fashion. the final impact is not known until all steps have occurred.
sudden changes generally
cause a one-time shift in claim liability estimates, although there may be some
lag in reliable quantification of their impact. evolutionary changes generally
cause a series of shifts in claim liability estimates, as each component of the
evolutionary change becomes evident and estimable.
actuarial methods
for analyzing and estimating claim and claim adjustment expense reserves.
the principal estimation and analysis methods utilized
by the companys actuaries are the paid development method, the case incurred
development method(1), the bornhuetter-ferguson (bf) method, and average value
analysis combined with the reported claim development method. the bf method is
usually utilized for more recent accident periods, with a transition to other
methods as the underlying claim data becomes more voluminous and therefore more
credible. these are typically referred to as traditional actuarial methods. (see
glossary for an explanation of these methods.)
while these are the principal methods utilized
throughout the company, those evaluating a particular component for a product
line have available to them the full range of methods developed within the
casualty actuarial profession. the companys actuaries are also continually
monitoring developments within the profession for advances in existing techniques
or the creation of new techniques that might improve current and future
estimates.
some components of
product line reserves are susceptible to relatively infrequent large claims
that can materially impact the total estimate for that component. in such
cases, the companys actuarial analysis generally isolates and analyzes
separately such large claims. the reserves excluding such large claims are
generally analyzed using the traditional methods described above. the reserves
associated with large claims are then analyzed utilizing various methods such
as:
estimating
the number of large claims and their average values based on historical trends
from prior accident periods, adjusted for the current environment and
supplemented with actual data for the accident year analyzed to the extent
available.
utilizing
individual claim adjuster estimates of the large claims, combined with
continual monitoring of the aggregate accuracy of such claim adjuster estimates.
(this monitoring may lead to supplemental adjustments to the aggregate of such
claim estimates.)
utilizing
historic longer-term average ratios of large claims to small claims, and
applying such ratios to the estimated ultimate small claims from traditional
analysis.
ground-up
analysis of the underlying exposure (typically used for asbestos and
environmental).
the results of such methodologies are subjected to
various reasonability and diagnostic tests, including paid-to-incurred loss
ratios, implied incurred-loss-to-earned-premium ratios and non-zero claim
severity trends. an actual versus expected analysis is also performed comparing
actual loss development to expected development based on the prior review. additional
analysis may be performed based on the results of these diagnostics, including
the investigation of other actuarial methods.
the above is generally
utilized to evaluate managements existing estimate for prior accident periods.
for the initial estimate of the current accident year, the available claim data
is typically insufficient to produce a reliable indication. hence, the initial
estimate for an accident year is generally based on a loss ratio projection
method which uses the earned premium for the current year multiplied by a
projected loss ratio. the projected loss ratio is determined through analysis
of prior experience periods using loss trend, rate level differences, mix of
business changes and other known or observed factors influencing the current
accident year relative to prior accident years. the exact number of prior accident
years utilized varies by product line component, based on the volume of
business for that component and the reliability of an individual accident year
estimate.
(1) the paid and incurred
development methods are sometimes also known as link ratio methods.
managements
estimates
at least once per quarter, certain company management
meets with its actuaries to review the latest claim and claim adjustment
expense reserve analyses. based on these analyses, management determines
whether its ultimate claim liability estimates should be changed. in doing so,
it must evaluate whether the new data provided represents credible actionable
information or an anomaly that will have no effect on estimated ultimate claim
liability. for example, as described above, payments may have decreased in one
geographic region due to fewer claim adjusters being available to process
claims. the resulting claim payment patterns would be analyzed to determine
whether or not the change in payment pattern represents a change in ultimate
claim liability.
such an assessment
requires considerable judgment. it is frequently not possible to determine
whether a change in the data is an anomaly until sometime after the event. even
if a change is determined to be permanent, it is not always possible to
reliably determine the extent of the change until sometime later. the overall
detailed analyses supporting such an effort can take several months to perform.
this is due to the need to evaluate the underlying cause of the trends
observed, and may include the gathering or assembling of data not previously
available. it may also include interviews with experts involved with the
underlying processes. as a result, there can be a time lag between the
emergence of a change and a determination that the change should be reflected
in the companys estimated claim liabilities. the final estimate selected by
management in a reporting period is based on these various detailed analyses of
past data, adjusted to reflect any new actionable information.
discussion of
product lines
the following section details reserving considerations
and common risk factors by product line. there are many additional risk factors
that may impact ultimate claim costs. each risk factor presented will have a
different impact on required reserves. also, risk factors can have offsetting
or compounding effects on required reserves. for example, in workers
compensation, the use of expensive medical procedures that result in medical
cost inflation may enable workers to return to work faster, thereby lowering
indemnity costs. thus, in almost all cases, it is impossible to discretely
measure the effect of a single risk factor and construct a meaningful
sensitivity expectation.
in order to provide
information on reasonably possible reserving changes by product line, the
historical changes in year-end loss reserves over a one-year period are
provided for the u.s. product lines. this information is provided for both the
company and the industry for the nine most recent years, and is based on the
most recent publicly available data for the reported line(s)that most
closely match the individual product line being discussed. these changes were
calculated, net of reinsurance, from statutory annual statement data found in
schedule p of those statements, and represent the reported reserve development
on the beginning-of-the-year claim liabilities divided by the beginning claim
liabilities, all accident years combined, excluding non-defense related claim
adjustment expense. data presented for the company includes history for the
entire st. paul travelers group (u.s. companies only), whether or not the
individual subsidiaries were originally part of spc or tpc. this treatment is
required by the statutory reporting instructions promulgated by state
regulatory authorities for schedule p. comparable data for non-u.s. companies
is not available.
general liability
general liability is generally considered a long tail
line, as it takes a relatively long period of time to finalize and settle claims
from a given accident year. the speed of claim reporting and claim settlement
is a function of the specific coverage provided, the jurisdiction and specific
policy provisions such as self-insured retentions. there are numerous
components underlying the general liability product line. some of these have
relatively moderate payment patterns (with most of the claims for a given
accident year
closed within 5 to 7
years), while others can have extreme lags in both reporting and payment of
claims (e.g., a reporting lag of a decade for construction defect claims).
while the majority of general liability coverages are
written on an occurrence basis, certain general liability coverages (such as
those covering directors and officers or professional liability) are typically
insured on a claims-made basis.
general liability reserves are generally analyzed as
two components: primary and excess/umbrella, with the primary component
generally analyzed separately for bodily injury and property damage. bodily
injury liability payments reimburse the claimant for damages pertaining to
physical injury as a result of the policyholders legal obligation arising from
non-intentional acts such as negligence, subject to the insurance policy
provisions. in some cases the damages can include future wage loss (which is a
function of future earnings power and wage inflation) and future medical
treatment costs. property damage liability payments result from damages to the
claimants private property arising from the policyholders legal obligation
for non-intentional acts. in most cases, property damage losses are a function
of costs as of the loss date, or soon thereafter. in addition, sizable or
unique exposures are reviewed separately, such as asbestos, environmental,
other mass torts, construction defect, medical malpractice and large unique
accounts that would otherwise distort the analysis. these unique categories
often require a very high degree of judgment and require reserve analyses that
do not rely on traditional actuarial methods.
defense costs are also a part of the insured costs
covered by liability policies and can be significant, sometimes greater than
the cost of the actual paid claims. for some products this risk is mitigated by
policy language such that the insured portion of defense costs erodes the
amount of policy limit available to pay the claim. such defense within the
limits policies are most common for claims made products. when defense costs
are outside of the limits, amounts paid for defense costs do not erode the
policy limits.
this line is typically the largest source of reserve
estimate uncertainty in the united states (excluding assumed reinsurance
contracts covering the same risk). major contributors to this reserve estimate
uncertainty include the reporting lag (i.e., the length of time between the
event triggering coverage and the actual reporting of the claim), the number of
parties involved in the underlying tort action, whether the event triggering
coverage is confined to only one time period or is spread over multiple time
periods, the potential dollars involved (in the individual claim actions),
whether such claims were reasonably foreseeable and intended to be covered at
the time the contracts were written (i.e., coverage dispute potential), and the
potential for mass claim actions. claims with longer reporting lags result in
greater inherent risk. this is especially true for alleged claims with a
latency feature, particularly where courts have ruled that coverage is spread
over multiple policy years, hence involving multiple defendants (and their
insurers and reinsurers) and multiple policies (thereby increasing the
potential dollars involved and the underlying settlement complexity). claims
with long latencies also increase the potential recognition lag, i.e., the lag
between writing a type of policy in a certain market and the recognition that
such policies have potential mass tort and/or latent claim exposure.
the amount of reserve estimate uncertainty also varies
significantly by component for the general liability product line. the
components in this product line with the longest latency, longest reporting
lags, largest potential dollars involved, and greatest claim settlement
complexity are asbestos and environmental. components that include latency,
reporting lag and/or complexity issues, but to a materially lesser extent than
asbestos and environmental, include construction defect, medical malpractice,
and other mass tort actions. many components of general liability are not
subject to material latency or claim complexity risks and hence have materially
less uncertainty than the previously mentioned components. in general, policies
providing coverage with shorter reporting lags, fewer parties involved in
settlement negotiations, only one policy potentially triggered per claim, fewer
potential settlement dollars, reasonably foreseeable (and stable) potential
hazards/claims and no mass tort potential result in much less reserve estimate
uncertainty than policies without those characteristics.
besides the traditional actuarial methods mentioned in
the general discussion section, the company utilizes various report year
development methods and s-curves for the construction defect components of this
product line. the construction defect report year development analysis is
supplemented with projected claim counts and average values for ibnr claim
counts. for components with greater lags in claim reporting, such as excess and
umbrella components of this product line, the company utilizes the bf method
more heavily than paid and case incurred development.
examples of common risk factors, or perceptions
thereof, that could change and, thus, affect the required general liability
reserves (beyond those included in the general discussion section) include:
general liability risk factors
changes in claim handling philosophies
changes in policy provisions or court interpretation of such provision
new theories of liability
trends in jury awards
changes in the propensity to sue, in general with specificity to particular
issues
changes in statutes of limitations
changes in the underlying court system
distortions from losses resulting from large single accounts or single issues
changes in tort law
shifts in law suit mix between federal and state courts
changes in claim adjuster office structure (causing distortions in the data)
changes in settlement patterns (e.g., medical malpractice)
general liability book of business risk factors
changes in policy provisions (e.g., deductibles, policy
limits, endorsements)
changes in underwriting standards
product mix (e.g., size of account, industries insured, jurisdiction mix)
unanticipated changes in risk factors can affect
reserves. as an indicator of the causal effect that a change in one or more
risk factors could have on reserves for general liability (excluding asbestos
and environmental), a 1% increase (decrease) in incremental paid loss
development for each future calendar year could result in a 1.6% increase
(decrease) in loss reserves.
historically, the one-year change in the reserve
estimate for this product line, excluding estimated asbestos and environmental
amounts, over the last nine years has varied from -3% to +14% (averaging+5%)
for the company and -4% to +7% (averaging +1%) for the industry overall. the
companys year-to-year changes are driven by and are based on observed
events during the year. because the high end of the companys range of
historical adverse development came from certain business that has since been
exited, the company believes that the industrys range of historical outcomes
is illustrative of reasonably possible one-year changes in reserve estimates
for this product line. general liability reserves (excluding asbestos and
environmental) represent approximately 26% of the companys total loss
reserves.
the companys change in
reserve estimate for this product line, excluding estimated asbestos and
environmental amounts, was +2% for 2006, +4% for 2005 and +10% for 2004. the
2006 change largely resulted from directors and officers and errors and
omissions adjustments due to worse than expected large loss activity and
additional information from detailed claim reviews, primarily associated with
accident years 2002 and 2003. the 2005 change was the net result of numerous
adjustments for various components with no individual item being a primary
driver. the 2004 change was principally due to the construction defect and
construction wrap-up reserving actions discussed on page76 of this
narrative.
property
property is generally considered a short tail line
with a simpler and faster claim reporting and adjustment process than liability
coverages, and less uncertainty in the reserve setting process (except for more
complex business interruption claims). it is generally viewed as a moderate
frequency, low to moderate severity line, except for catastrophes and coverage
related to large properties. the claim reporting and settlement process for
property coverage claim reserves is generally restricted to the insured and the
insurer. overall, the claim liabilities for this line create a low estimation
risk, except possibly for catastrophes and business interruption claims.
property reserves are typically analyzed in two
components, one for catastrophic or other large single events, and another for
all other events. examples of common risk factors, or perceptions thereof, that
could change and, thus, affect the required property reserves (beyond those
included in the general discussion section) include:
property risk factors
physical concentration of policyholders
availability and cost of local contractors
for the more severe catastrophic events, demand surge inflation, which refers
to significant short-term increases in building material and labor costs due to
a sharp increase in demand for those materials and services
local building codes
amount of time to return property to full usage (for business interruption
claims)
court interpretation of policy provisions (such as occurrence definition, or
wind versus flooding)
lags in reporting claims (e.g., winter damage to summer homes, hidden damage
after an earthquake)
court or legislative changes to the statute of limitations
property book of business risk factors
policy provisions mix (e.g., deductibles, policy limits,
endorsements)
changes in underwriting standards
unanticipated changes in risk factors can affect
reserves. as an indicator of the causal effect that a change in one or more
risk factors could have on reserves for property, a 1% increase (decrease) in
incremental paid loss development for each future calendar year could result in
a 1.1% increase (decrease) in loss reserves.
historically, the one-year change in the reserve
estimate for this product line over the last nine years has varied from -34%
to +26% (averaging -4%) for the company and -14% to +7% (averaging
0%) for the industry overall. the companys year-to-year changes are driven by
and are based on observed events during the year. because the high end of the
companys range of historical adverse development came from certain business
that has since been exited, the company believes that the industrys range of
historical outcomes is illustrative of reasonably possible one-year changes in
reserve estimates for this product line.
while property is considered a short tail coverage,
the one year change can be more volatile than the longer tail product lines. this
is due to the fact that the majority of the reserve relates to the most recent
accident year, which is subject to the most uncertainty for all product lines. this
recent accident year uncertainty is relevant to property due to weather related
events which tend to be concentrated in the last half of the year and generally
dont clearly resolve until the following year.
the companys change in
reserve estimate for this product line was -11% for 2006, -34% for
2005 and-18% for 2004. the 2006 change primarily reflected less
demand surge inflation than originally estimated for 2005 accident year non-catastrophe
and catastrophe losses. the 2005 and 2004 changes were primarily due to better
than expected results from changes in policy provisions as well as underwriting
and pricing criteria. the reserve estimates for this product line are also
potentially subject to material changes due to uncertainty in measuring
ultimate losses for unprecedented significant catastrophes such as the events
of september11, 2001 and hurricane katrina. such material changes did not
materialize in 2006, 2005 or 2004.
commercial
multi-peril
commercial multi-peril provides a combination of
property and liability coverage typically for small businesses and, therefore,
includes both short and long tail coverages. for property coverage, it
generally takes a relatively short period of time to close claims, while for
the other coverages, generally for the liability coverages, it takes a longer
period of time to close claims.
the reserving risk for this line is dominated by the liability
coverage portion of this product, except occasionally in the event of
catastrophic or large single losses. the reserving risk for this line differs
from that of the general liability product line and the property product line
due to the nature of the customer. commercial multi-peril is generally sold to
smaller sized accounts, while the customer profile for general liability and
property include larger customers.
see property risk factors and general liability
risk factors, discussed above, with regard to reserving risk for commercial
multi-peril.
unanticipated changes in risk factors can affect
reserves. as an indicator of the causal effect that a change in one or more
risk factors could have on reserves for commercial multi-peril (excluding
asbestos and environmental), a 1% increase (decrease) in incremental paid loss
development for each future calendar year could result in a 1.2% increase
(decrease) in loss reserves.
historically, the one-year change in the reserve
estimate for this product line over the last nine years has varied from -6%
to +2% (averaging -3%) for the company and -2% to +6% (averaging
+2%) for the industry overall. the companys year-to-year changes are driven by
and are based on observed events during the year. the company believes that its
range of historical outcomes is illustrative of reasonably possible one-year
changes in reserve estimates for this product line. commercial multi-peril
reserves represent approximately 8% of the companys total loss reserves.
as discussed above, this line combines general
liability and property coverages and it has been impacted in the past by many
of the same events as those two lines.
the companys change in
reserve estimate for this product line was -4% for 2006, -6% for
2005 and-5% for 2004. the 2006 change was attributable to better
than expected results due to, among other factors, increasingly favorable legal
and judicial environments as well as enhanced risk control, underwriting and
claim process initiatives. the 2005 change was the result of increasingly
favorable legal and judicial environments, coupled with better than expected
results from changes in policy provisions as well as underwriting and pricing
criteria. the 2004 change was primarily attributable to better than expected
results from changes in underwriting and pricing strategies.
commercial
automobile
the commercial automobile product line is a mix of
property and liability coverages and, therefore, includes both short and long
tail coverages. the payments that are made quickly typically pertain to auto
physical damage (property) claims and property damage (liability) claims. the
payments that take longer to finalize and are more difficult to estimate relate
to bodily injury claims. in general, claim reporting lags are minor, claim
complexity is not a major issue, and the line is viewed as high frequency, low
to moderate severity. overall, the claim liabilities for this line create a
moderate estimation risk.
commercial automobile reserves are typically analyzed
in four components; bodily injury liability, property damage liability,
collision claims and comprehensive claims. these last two components have
minimum reserve risk and fast payouts and, accordingly, separate risk factors
are not presented.
the company utilizes the traditional actuarial methods
mentioned in the general discussion above in estimating claim liabilities for
this line. this is supplemented with detailed custom analyses where needed.
examples of common risk factors, or perceptions
thereof, that could change and, thus, affect the required commercial automobile
reserves (beyond those included in the general discussion section) include:
bodily injury and property damage liability risk
factors
trends in jury awards
changes in the underlying court system
changes in case law
litigation trends
frequency of claims with payment capped by policy limits
change in average severity of accidents, or proportion of severe accidents
changes in auto safety technology
subrogation opportunities
changes in claim handling philosophies
frequency of visits to health providers
number of medical procedures given during visits to health providers
types of health providers used
types of medical treatments received
changes in cost of medical treatments
degree of patient responsiveness to treatment
commercial automobile book of business risk factors
changes in policy provisions (e.g., deductibles, policy
limits, endorsements, etc.)
changes in mix of insured vehicles (e.g., long haul trucks versus local and
smaller vehicles, fleet risks versus non-fleets)
changes in underwriting standards
unanticipated changes in risk factors can affect
reserves. as an indicator of the causal effect that a change in one or more
risk factors could have on reserves for commercial automobile, a 1% increase
(decrease) in incremental paid loss development for each future calendar year
could result in a 1.3% increase (decrease) in loss reserves.
historically, the one-year change in the reserve
estimate for this product line over the last nine years has varied from -7%
to +9% (averaging +1%) for the company and -1% to +9% (averaging +2%) for
the industry overall. the companys year-to-year changes are driven by and are
based on observed events during the year. the company believes that its range
of historical outcomes is illustrative of reasonably possible one-year changes
in reserve estimates for this product line. commercial automobile reserves
represent approximately 7% of the companys total loss reserves.
the companys change in
reserve estimate for this product line was -7% for 2006, -5% for
2005 and -2% for 2004. the 2006 change was due to better than expected
loss development, primarily for accident years 2003 through 2005, which was
attributable to favorable legal and judicial environments, claim handling
initiatives and improvements in auto safety technology. the 2005 change was due
to the effect of increasingly favorable legal and judicial environments as well
as better than expected results from changes in policy provisions as well as underwriting
and pricing criteria, especially for accident year 2004. the 2004 change was
due to better than expected results from underwriting and pricing strategies,
especially for accident year 2003.
workers
compensation
workers compensation is generally considered a long
tail coverage, as it takes a relatively long period of time to finalize claims
from a given accident year. while certain payments such as initial medical
treatment or temporary wage replacement for the injured worker are made
quickly, some other payments are made over the course of several years, such as
awards for permanent partial injuries. in addition, some payments can run as
long as the injured workers life, such as permanent disability benefits and
on-going medical care. despite the possibility of long payment tails, the
reporting lags are generally short, settlements are generally not complex, and
most of the liability can be considered high frequency with moderate severity.
the largest reserve risk generally comes from the low frequency, high severity
claims providing lifetime coverage for medical expense arising from a workers
injury. overall, the claim liabilities for this line create a somewhat greater
than moderate estimation risk.
workers compensation reserves are typically analyzed
in three components: indemnity losses, medical losses and claim adjustment
expenses.
examples of common risk
factors, or perceptions thereof, that could change and, thus, affect the
required workers compensation reserves (beyond those included in the general
discussion section) include:
indemnity risk
factors
time required to recover from the injury
degree of available transitional jobs
degree of legal
involvement
changes in the interpretations and processes of the workers compensation
commissions oversight of claims(1)
future wage inflation for states that index benefits
changes in the administrative policies of second injury funds
medical risk factors
changes in the cost of medical treatments (including
prescription drugs) and underlying fee schedules (inflation)
frequency of visits to health providers
number of medical procedures given during visits to health providers
types of health providers used
type of medical treatments received
use of preferred provider networks and other medical cost containment practices
availability of new medical processes and equipment
changes in the use of pharmaceutical drugs
degree of patient responsiveness to treatment
general workers compensation risk factors
frequency of claim reopenings on claims previously closed
mortality trends of injured workers with lifetime benefits and medical
treatment
degree of cost shifting between workers compensation and health insurance
workers compensation book of business risk factors
product mix
injury type mix
changes in underwriting standards
unanticipated changes in risk factors can affect
reserves. as an indicator of the causal effect that a change in one or more
risk factors could have on reserves for workers compensation, a 1% increase
(decrease) in incremental paid loss development for each future calendar year
could result in a 1.3% increase (decrease) in loss reserves.
historically, the one-year change in the reserve
estimate for this product line over the last nine years has varied from -2%
to +2% (averaging -1%) for the company and -2% to +4% (averaging
+1%) for the industry overall. the companys year-to-year changes are driven by
and are based on observed events during the year. the company believes that its
range of historical outcomes is illustrative of reasonably possible one-year
changes in reserve estimates for this product line. workers compensation reserves
represent approximately 26% of the companys total loss reserves.
the companys change in
reserve estimate for this product line was 0% for 2006, 0% for 2005 and+1%
for 2004.
fidelity and surety
fidelity is generally considered a short tail
coverage. it takes a relatively short period of time to finalize and settle
fidelity claims. the volatility of fidelity reserves is generally related to
the type of business of the insured, the size and complexity of the insureds business
operations, amount of policy limit
(1) these are administrative
bodies that evaluate whether or not a given claim for workers compensation
benefits is valid. duties include the determination of whether a given injury
arose out of the scope of employment, or the determination of the degree of
injury where disputes exist.
and attachment point of coverage. the uncertainty
surrounding reserves for small, commercial insureds is typically less than the
uncertainty for large commercial or financial institutions. the high frequency,
low severity nature of small commercial fidelity losses provides for stability
in loss estimates whereas, the low frequency, high severity nature of losses
for large insureds results in a wider range of ultimate loss outcomes.
actuarial techniques that rely on a stable pattern of loss development are
generally not applicable to low frequency, high severity policies.
surety has certain components that are generally
considered short tail coverages with short reporting lags, although large
individual construction and commercial surety contracts can result in a long
settlement tail, based on the length and complexity of the construction project
or commercial transaction being insured. (large construction projects can take
many years to complete.) the frequency of losses in surety correlates with
economic cycles as the primary cause of surety loss is the inability to perform
financially. the volatility of surety losses is generally related to the type
of business performed by the insured, the type of bonded obligation, the amount
of limit exposed to loss and the amount of assets available to the insurer to
mitigate losses, such as unbilled contract funds, collateral, first and third
party indemnity, and other security positions of an insureds assets. certain
classes of surety claims are very high severity, low frequency in nature. these
can include large construction contractors involved with one or multiple large,
complex projects as well as certain large commercial surety exposures. other
claim factors affecting reserve variability of surety include litigation
related to amounts owed by and due the insured (e.g., salvage and subrogation
efforts) and the results of financial restructuring of an insured.
examples of common risk factors, or perceptions
thereof, that could change and, thus, affect the required fidelity and surety
reserves (beyond those included in the general discussion section) include:
fidelity risk factors
type of business of insured
policy limit and attachment points
third-party claims
coverage litigation
complexity of claims
growth in insureds operations
surety risk factors
economic trends, including the general level of construction
activity
concentration of reserves in a relatively few large claims
type of business insured
type of obligation insured
cumulative limits of liability for insured
assets available to mitigate loss
defective workmanship/latent defects
financial strategy of insured
changes in statutory obligations
geographic spread of business
fidelity and surety book of business risk factors
changes in policy provisions (e.g., deductibles, limits,
endorsements)
changes in underwriting standards
unanticipated changes in risk factors can affect
reserves. as an indicator of the causal effect that a change in one or more
risk factors could have on reserves for fidelity and surety, a 1% increase
(decrease) in incremental paid loss development for each future calendar year
could result in a 1.2% increase (decrease) in loss reserves.
historically, the one-year change in the reserve
estimate for this product line over the last nine years has varied from -15%
to +138% (averaging +20%) for the company and -9% to +24% (averaging +7%)
for the industry overall. the companys year-to-year changes are driven by and
are based on observed events during the year. because the high end of the
companys range was due to acquired business in 2004, the company believes that
the industrys range of historical outcomes is illustrative of reasonably
possible one-year changes in reserve estimates for this product line. fidelity
and surety reserves represent approximately 3% of the companys total loss
reserves.
in general, developments on single large claims (both
adverse and favorable) are a primary source of changes in reserve estimates for
this product line.
the companys change in
reserve estimate for this product line was -5% for 2006, 0% for 2005 and+138%
for 2004. the 2006 change was due to better than expected large loss activity. the
2004 change resulted from acquired business, including a large construction
contractor loss discussed on page77 of this narrative.
personal automobile
personal automobile includes both short and long tail
coverages. the payments that are made quickly typically pertain to auto
physical damage (property) claims and property damage (liability) claims. the
payments that take longer to finalize and are more difficult to estimate relate
to bodily injury claims. reporting lags are relatively short and the claim
settlement process for personal automobile liability generally is the least
complex of the liability products. it is generally viewed as a high frequency,
low to moderate severity product line. overall, the claim liabilities for this
line create a moderate estimation risk.
personal automobile reserves are typically analyzed in
five components: bodily injury liability, property damage liability, no-fault
losses, collision claims and comprehensive claims. these last two components
have minimum reserve risk and fast payouts and, accordingly, separate factors
are not presented.
examples of common risk factors, or perceptions
thereof, that could change and, thus, affect the required personal automobile
reserves (beyond those included in the general discussion section) include:
bodily injury and property damage liability risk
factors
trends in jury awards
changes in the underlying court system and its philosophy
changes in case law
litigation trends
frequency of claims with payment capped by policy limits
change in average severity of accidents, or proportion of severe accidents
subrogation opportunities
degree of patient responsiveness to treatment
changes in claim handling philosophies
no-fault risk factors (for selected states and time
periods)
effectiveness of no-fault laws
frequency of visits to health providers
number of medical procedures given during visits to health providers
types of health providers used
types of medical treatments received
changes in cost of medical treatments
degree of patient responsiveness to treatment
personal automobile book of business risk factors
changes in policy provisions (e.g., deductibles, policy
limits, endorsements, etc.)
changes in underwriting standards
unanticipated changes in risk factors can affect
reserves. as an indicator of the causal effect that a change in one or more
risk factors could have on reserves for personal automobile, a 1% increase
(decrease) in incremental paid loss development for each future calendar year
could result in a 1.1% increase (decrease) in loss reserves.
historically, the one-year change in the reserve
estimate for this product line over the last nine years has varied from -9%
to +1% (averaging -4%) for the company and -7% to 0% (averaging -3%)
for the industry overall. the companys year-to-year changes are driven by and
are based on observed events during the year. the company believes that its
range of historical outcomes is illustrative of reasonably possible one-year
changes in reserve estimates for this product line. personal automobile
reserves represent approximately 4% of the companys total loss reserves.
the companys change in
reserve estimate for this product line was -7% for 2006, -9% for
2005 and-6% for 2004. the decreases in 2006 and 2005 were primarily
due to better than expected results from changes in claim handling practices as
well as initiatives to fight fraud. the 2004 change was driven by better than
expected frequency and severity, which is believed to have been principally
caused by societal trends as well as fraud initiatives.
homeowners and
personal lines other
homeowners is generally considered a short tail coverage.
most payments are related to the property portion of the policy, where the
claim reporting and settlement process is generally restricted to the insured
and the insurer. claims on property coverage are typically reported soon after
the actual damage occurs, although delays of several months are not unusual.
the claim is settled when the two parties agree on the amount due in accordance
with the policy contract language and the appropriate payment is made (or
alternatively, the property replacement/repair is performed by the insurer).
the resulting settlement process is typically fairly short term, although
exceptions do exist.
the liability portion of the homeowners policy
generates claims which take longer to pay due to the involvement of litigation
and negotiation, but with generally small reporting lags. in addition, reserves
related to umbrella coverages have greater uncertainty since umbrella liability
payments are often made far into the future.
overall, the line is generally high frequency, low to
moderate severity (except for catastrophes), with simple to moderate claim
complexity.
homeowners reserves are typically analyzed in two
components: non-catastrophe related losses and catastrophe loss payments.
examples of common risk factors, or perceptions
thereof, that could change and, thus, affect the required homeowners reserves
(beyond those included in the general reserve discussion section) include:
non-catastrophe risk factors
salvage opportunities
amount of time to return property to residential use
changes in weather patterns
local building codes
litigation trends
trends in jury awards
catastrophe risk factors
physical concentration of policyholders
availability and cost of local contractors
local building codes
quality of construction of damaged homes
amount of time to return property to residential use
for the more severe catastrophic events, demand surge inflation, which refers
to significant short-term increases in building material and labor costs due to
a sharp increase in demand for those materials and services
homeowners book of business risk factors
policy provisions mix (e.g., deductibles, policy limits,
endorsements, etc.)
degree of concentration of policyholders
changes in underwriting standards
unanticipated changes in risk factors can affect
reserves. as an indicator of the causal effect that a change in one or more
risk factors could have on reserves for homeowners and personal lines other, a
1% increase (decrease) in incremental paid loss development for each future
calendar year could result in a 1.1% increase (decrease) in loss reserves.
historically, the one-year change in the reserve
estimate for this product line over the last nine years has varied from -31%
to +3% (averaging -11%) for the company and -9% to +11% (averaging -2%)
for the industry overall. the companys year-to-year changes are driven by and
are based on observed events during the year. the company believes that its
range of historical outcomes is illustrative of reasonably possible one-year
changes in reserve estimates for this product line. homeowners and personal
lines other reserves represent approximately 2% of the companys total loss
reserves.
this line combines both liability and property
coverages; however the majority of the reserves relate to property. while
property is considered a short tail coverage, the one year change can be more
volatile than the longer tail product lines. this is due to the fact that the
majority of the reserve relates to the most recent accident year, which is
subject to the most uncertainty for all product lines. this recent accident
year uncertainty is relevant to property due to weather related events which
tend to be concentrated in the last half of the year and generally do not clearly
resolve until the following year.
the companys change in
reserve estimate for this product line was -22% for 2006, +3% for 2005
and-31% for 2004. the 2006 change was due to lower than expected
additional living expenses related to hurricane katrina as well as better than
expected non-catastrophe related frequency and severity, due in part to changes
in the marketplace, such as higher deductibles and fewer small-dollar claims,
and continued evidence of a less than expected impact from demand surge. the
2005 change was driven by additional loss development from the 2004 florida
hurricanes. the 2004 change was driven by favorable
loss
development, particularly from fewer claim counts for accident year 2003 as a
result of changes in the marketplace, including higher policy deductible levels
and fewer small dollar claims.
international and
other
international and other includes products written by
international and lloyds and other products not discussed above. the principal
component of other claim reserves is assumed reinsurance written on an
excess-of-loss basis, which may include reinsurance of non-u.s. exposures, and
is primarily runoff business.
international and other claim liabilities result from
a mix of coverages, currencies and jurisdictions/countries. the common
characteristic is the need to customize the analysis to the individual
component, and the inability to rely on data characterizations and reporting
requirements in the u.s. statutory reporting framework.
due to changes in the business mix for this line over
time, the recently incurred claim liabilities are relatively short term (due to
both the products and the jurisdictions involved, e.g., the republic of ireland
and the united kingdom), while the older liabilities include some from runoff
operations that are extremely long tail (e.g., u.s. excess liabilities
reinsured through the london market, and several underwriting pools in runoff).
the speed of claim reporting and claim settlement is a function of the specific
coverage provided, the jurisdiction, the distribution system (e.g.,
underwriting pool versus direct), and the proximity of the insurance sale to
the insured hazard (e.g., insured and insurer located in different countries).
in particular, liabilities arising from the underwriting pools in runoff may
result in significant reporting lags, settlement lags and claim complexity, due
to the need to coordinate with other pool members or co-insurers through a
broker or lead-insurer for claim settlement purposes.
international and other reserves are generally
analyzed by program/pool, country and general coverage category (e.g., u.s.
liabilityexcess of loss reinsurance, or general liabilitymunicipalitiesby
country). the business is also generally split by direct versus assumed
reinsurance for a given coverage/jurisdiction. where the underlying insured
hazard is outside the united states, the underlying coverages are generally
similar to those described under the general liability and automobile
discussion above, but under a different legal system. where the underlying
hazard is within the u.s., the coverage involved is typically that of general
liability, but on an excess or excess-of-loss reinsurance basis. excess
exposure requires the insured to prove not only claims under the policy, but
also the prior payment of claims reaching up to the excess policys attachment
point.
examples of common risk factors, or perceptions
thereof, that could change and, thus, affect the required international and
other reserves (beyond those included in the general discussion section)
include:
international and other risk factors
changes in claim handling procedures, including those of the
primary carriers
changes in policy provisions or court interpretation of such provision
new theories of liability
trends in jury awards
changes in the propensity to sue
changes in statutes of limitations
changes in the underlying court system
distortions from losses resulting from large single accounts or single issues
changes in tort law
changes in claim adjuster office structure (causing distortions in the data)
international and other book of business risk factors
changes in policy provisions (e.g., deductibles, policy
limits, endorsements, claims made language)
changes in underwriting standards
product mix (e.g., size of account, industries insured, jurisdiction mix)
unanticipated changes in risk factors can affect
reserves. as an indicator of the causal effect that a change in one or more
risk factors could have on reserves for international and other (excluding
asbestos and environmental), a 1% increase (decrease) in incremental paid loss
development for each future calendar year could result in a 1.3% increase
(decrease) in loss reserves. international and other reserves (excluding
asbestos and environmental) represent approximately 10% of the companys total
loss reserves.
international and other
represents a combination of different product lines, some of which are in
runoff. comparative historical information is not available for international
product lines as insurers domiciled outside of the u.s. do not file u.s.
statutory reports. comparative historical information on runoff business is not
indicative of reasonably possible one-year changes in the reserve estimate for
this mix of runoff business. accordingly, the company has not included
comparative analyses for international and other.
reinsurance
recoverables
amounts recoverable from reinsurers are estimated in a
manner consistent with the associated claim liability. the company evaluates
and monitors the financial condition of its reinsurers under voluntary
reinsurance arrangements to minimize its exposure to significant losses from
reinsurer insolvencies. in addition, in the ordinary course of business, the
company becomes involved in coverage disputes with its reinsurers. some of
these disputes could result in lawsuits and arbitrations brought by or against
the reinsurers to determine the companys rights and obligations under the
various reinsurance agreements. the company employs dedicated specialists and
aggressive strategies to manage reinsurance collections and disputes.
the company reports its reinsurance recoverables net
of an allowance for estimated uncollectible reinsurance recoverables. the
allowance is based upon the companys ongoing review of amounts outstanding,
length of collection periods, changes in reinsurer credit standing, disputes,
applicable coverage defenses, and other relevant factors. accordingly, the
establishment of reinsurance recoverables and the related allowance for
uncollectible reinsurance recoverables is also an inherently uncertain process
involving estimates. changes in these estimates could result in additional
income statement charges. the allowance for uncollectible reinsurance at december31,
2006 declined by $31 million from the same date in 2005.
recoverables attributable to structured settlements
relate primarily to personal injury claims, for which the company has purchased
annuities and remains contingently liable in the event of a default by the
companies issuing the annuities. recoverables attributable to mandatory pools
and associations relate primarily to workers compensation service business and
have the obligation of the participating insurance companies on a joint and
several basis supporting these cessions.
the
following table summarizes the composition of the companys reinsurance
recoverable assets:
(atdecember31,inmillions)
gross reinsurance
recoverables on paid and unpaid claims and claim adjustment expenses
$
12,837
$
14,177
allowance for
uncollectible reinsurance
(773
)
(804
)
net
reinsurance recoverables
12,064
13,373
structured
settlements
3,758
3,990
mandatory pools
and associations
1,998
2,211
total reinsurance recoverables
$
17,820
$
19,574
investment
valuation and impairments
valuation of
investments
fixed maturities
and equity securities
fixed maturities are valued based upon quoted market
prices or dealer quotes, or if quoted market prices or dealer quotes are not
available, discounted expected cash flows using market rates commensurate with
the credit quality and maturity of the investment. equity securities are valued
based on quoted market prices.
the
following table identifies the fair value of fixed maturity securities by
pricing source at december31, 2006 and 2005.
(inmillions)
fairvalue
%oftotal
fairvalue
fairvalue
%oftotal
fairvalue
priced via
independent market quotations
$
61,946
91.6
%
$
58,351
91.5
%
priced via broker
quotations
0.3
0.3
priced via
matrices
0.4
0.3
priced via other
methods
0.4
0.4
short-term
investments(1)
4,938
7.3
4,802
7.5
total
$
67,604
100.0
%
$
63,785
100.0
%
(1) short-term investments
are primarily valued at amortized cost, which approximates fair value.
the fair value of a
financial instrument is the amount at which the instrument could be exchanged
in a current transaction between knowledgeable, unrelated willing parties. as
such, the estimated fair value of a financial instrument may differ
significantly from the amount that could be realized if the security was sold
immediately.
real estate
fair value is established
at the time of acquisition by internal analysis or external appraisers, using
discounted cash flow analyses and other acceptable techniques. the company had
no real estate held for sale at december31, 2006 or 2005.
venture capital
investments
other investments include venture capital investments,
which are generally non-publicly traded instruments in early-stage companies
and, historically, have a holding period of four to seven years. these
investments have primarily been made in the health care, software and computer
services, and networking
and information
technologies infrastructures industries. the company typically is involved with
venture capital companies early in their formation, as they are developing and
determining the viability of, and market demand for, their product. generally,
the company does not expect these venture capital companies to record revenues
in the early stages of their development, which can often take three to four
years, and does not generally expect them to become profitable for an even
longer period of time.
certain venture capital investments that are
controlled by the company are consolidated in the companys financial
statements. the underlying investments of these venture capital investments are
reported at estimated fair value. the
fair value of the venture capital investments is based on an estimate
determined by the external fund manager and reviewed by the company for
investments in which there is no public market. the external fund manager
reviews such factors as recent filings, operating results, balance sheet stability,
growth, and other business and market sector fundamental statistics in
estimating fair values of specific investments.
with respect to the
companys valuation of such non-publicly traded venture capital investments, on
a quarterly basis, the companys portfolio managers and the external fund
manager review and consider a variety of factors in determining the valuation
of the investments and the potential for other-than-temporary impairments.
factors considered include the following:
the
investees most recent financing events;
an
analysis of whether a fundamental deterioration or improvement has occurred;
whether
the investees progress has been substantially more or less than expected;
whether
or not the valuations have improved or declined significantly in the investees
market sector;
whether
or not the external fund manager and the company believe it is probable that
the investee will need financing within six months at a lower price than our
carrying value; and
whether
or not the company has the ability and intent to hold the investment for a
period of time sufficient to allow for recovery, enabling it to receive value
equal to or greater than our cost.
the quarterly valuation
procedures described above are in addition to the portfolio managers ongoing
responsibility to frequently monitor developments affecting those invested
assets, paying particular attention to events that might give rise to
impairment write-downs.
non-publicly traded
investments
the companys investment portfolio includes
non-publicly traded investments, such as venture capital investments (as
discussed above), private equity limited partnerships, joint ventures, other
limited partnerships, and certain fixed income securities. the company uses the
equity method of accounting for joint ventures, limited partnerships and
certain private equity securities. certain other private equity investments,
including venture capital investments are reported at estimated fair value. these non-publicly traded securities are
valued based on factors such as management judgment, recent financial
information and other market data.
the
following is a summary of the approximate carrying value of the companys
non-publicly traded securities at december31, 2006:
(inmillions)
carryingvalue
investment
partnerships, including hedge funds
$
2,077
fixed income
securities
equity
investments
real estate
partnerships and joint ventures
venture capital
total
$
3,114
investment
impairments
the company recognizes an impairment loss when an
invested assets value declines below cost, adjusted for accretion,
amortization and previous other-than-temporary impairments (new cost basis),
and the change is deemed to be other-than-temporary, or if it is determined
that the company will not be able to recover all amounts due pursuant to the
issuers contractual obligations prior to sale or maturity. when the company
determines that an invested asset is other-than-temporarily impaired, the
invested asset is written down to fair value and the amount of the impairment
is included in earnings as a realized investment loss. the fair value then
becomes the new cost basis of the investment and any subsequent recoveries in
fair value are recognized at disposition.
the company recognizes a realized loss when impairment
is deemed to be other-than-temporary even if a decision to sell an invested
asset has not been made. when the company has decided to sell a temporarily
impaired available-for-sale invested asset and the company does not expect the
fair value of the invested asset to fully recover prior to the expected time of
sale, the invested asset is deemed to be other-than-temporarily impaired in the
period in which the decision to sell is made.
factors considered in determining whether a decline is
other-than-temporary include the length of time and the extent to which fair
value has been below cost, the financial condition and near-term prospects of
the issuer, and the companys ability and intent to hold the investment for a
period of time sufficient to allow for any anticipated recovery.
the companys
process for reviewing invested assets for impairments during any quarter
includes the following:
identification
and evaluation of investments that have possible indications of
other-than-temporary impairment, which includes an analysis of investments with
gross unrealized investment losses that have fair values less than 80% of cost
for six consecutive months or more;
review
of portfolio manager(s)recommendations for other-than-temporary
impairments based on the investees current financial condition, liquidity,
near-term recovery prospects and other factors;
consideration
of evidential matter, including an evaluation of factors or triggers that may
cause individual investments to qualify as having other-than-temporary
impairments; and
determination of the status
of each analyzed investment as other-than-temporary or not, with documentation
of the rationale for the decision.
sales of
temporarily impaired invested assets
the company may, from time
to time, sell invested assets subsequent to the balance sheet date that were
considered temporarily impaired at the balance sheet date for several reasons. for
all subsequent
sales of
invested assets that were considered temporarily impaired at the balance sheet
date, the company contemporaneously documents its rationale for its change in
intent or ability to hold to recovery. the rationale for the change in the
companys ability and intent generally focuses on changes in the economic facts
and circumstances related to the invested asset subsequent to the balance sheet
date, significant unforeseen changes in the companys liquidity needs, or
changes in tax laws or the regulatory environment.
fixed maturities
and equity securities
an investment in a fixed
maturity or equity security which is available for sale is impaired if its fair
value falls below its cost or new cost basis and the decline is considered to
be other-than-temporary. a fixed maturity security is other-than-temporarily
impaired if it is probable that the company will not be able to collect all
amounts due under the securitys contractual terms or where the company does
not have the intent to hold the security. equity securities are
other-than-temporarily impaired when it becomes apparent that the company will
not recover its cost over the expected holding period. further, for securities
expected to be sold, an other-than-temporary impairment charge is recognized if
the company does not expect the fair value of a security to recover prior to
the expected date of sale. additionally, for certain securitized financial
assets with contractual cash flows (including asset-backed securities), the
company periodically updates its best estimate of cash flows over the life of
the security. if management determines that the fair value of a securitized
financial asset is less than its carrying amount and there has been a decrease
in the present value of the estimated cash flows since the last revised
estimate, considering both timing and amount, then an other-than-temporary
impairment is recognized.
real estate
investments
the carrying value of a real estate property is
reviewed for impairment when events or changes in circumstances indicate that
the carrying amount may not be recoverable. the review for impairment includes
an estimate of the undiscounted cash flows expected to result from the use and
eventual disposition of the real estate property. an impairment loss is
recognized if the expected future undiscounted cash flows are less than the
carrying value of the real estate property. the impairment loss is measured as
the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds fair value.
other investments
mortgage loans
a mortgage loan is considered impaired when it is
probable that the company will be unable to collect principal and interest
amounts due. for mortgage loans that are determined to be impaired, a reserve
is established for the difference between the amortized cost and fair market
value of the underlying collateral. in estimating fair value, the company uses
interest rates reflecting the current real estate financing market returns.
impaired loans were not material at december31, 2006 and 2005.
venture capital investments and non-publicly traded
investments
venture capital
investments and non-publicly traded investments are reviewed quarterly for
other-than-temporary impairment by the external fund manager and the companys
portfolio managers. an impairment loss is recognized if, based on the specific
facts and circumstances, it is probable that the company will not be able to
recover all of the cost of an individual holding. for a further discussion,
please see the venture capital investments and non-publicly traded investments sections under the valuation of investments
above.
goodwill
impairments
statement of financial accounting standards no.142,
goodwill and other intangible assets (fas142),
provides guidance on accounting for goodwill subsequent to acquisition. accordingly,
the company performs a review on at least an annual basis, of goodwill held by
its reporting units, which are the companys three operating and reportable
segments: business insurance, financial, professional& international
insurance and personal insurance.
in august2006, the company announced a realignment
of two of its three reportable business segments. the former commercial and
specialty segments were realigned into the business insurance segment and the
financial, professional& international insurance segment. the personal
segment was renamed personal insurance. goodwill was reallocated among the
reportable business segments to align the acquired business with the
appropriate reporting segment.
the impairment test, in
accordance with fas 142, is a two-step process. the first step is to identify
any potential impairment using a multiple-of-earnings approach to estimate the
fair value of the reporting units. the fair values of the reporting units are
then compared to their carrying value, including goodwill. if the carrying
amounts of the reporting units exceed their fair value, a second step is
performed to measure the amount of impairment, if any. the companys review
resulted in no impairment of goodwill for the years ended december31,
2006 and 2005.
other uncertainties
for a discussion of other
risks and uncertainties that could impact the companys results of operations
or financial condition, see note 15 of notes to the companys consolidated
financial statements and item1arisk factors.
future application
of accounting standards
see note 1 of notes to the
companys consolidated financial statements for a discussion of recently issued
accounting pronouncements.
forward-looking
statements
this report may contain, and management may make,
certain forward-looking statements within the meaning of the private
securities litigation reform act of 1995. all statements, other than statements
of historical facts, may be forward-looking statements. specifically, the
company may make forward-looking statements about the companys results of
operations (including, among others, premium volume, income from continuing
operations, net and operating income and return on equity), financial condition
and liquidity; the sufficiency of the companys asbestos and other reserves (including,
among others, asbestos claim payment patterns); the cost and availability of
reinsurance coverage; and strategic initiatives. such statements are subject to
risks and uncertainties, many of which are difficult to predict and generally
beyond the companys control, that could cause actual results to differ
materially from those expressed in, or implied or projected by, the
forward-looking information and statements.
for a discussion of some of the factors that could
cause actual results to differ, see item 1arisk factors and
item7managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and
results of operationscritical accounting estimates.
the companys forward-looking
statements speak only as of the date of this report or as of the date they are
made, and the company undertakes no obligation to update its forward-looking
statements.
item 7a. quantitative
and qualitative disclosures about market risk
market risk
market risk is the risk of loss arising from adverse
changes in market rates and prices, such as interest rates, foreign currency
exchange rates, and other relevant market rate or price changes. market risk is
directly influenced by the volatility and liquidity in the markets in which the
related underlying assets are traded. the following is a discussion of the
companys primary market risk exposures and how those exposures are managed as
of december31, 2006. the companys market risk sensitive instruments, including
derivatives, are primarily entered into for purposes other than trading.
the carrying value of the companys investment
portfolio as of december31, 2006 and 2005 was $72.27 billion and $68.29
billion, respectively, of which 87% and 86% was invested in fixed maturity
securities, respectively. at december31, 2006 and 2005, approximately 6%
of the companys invested assets were denominated in foreign currencies. the
companys exposure to equity price risk is not significant. the company has no
direct commodity risk.
the primary market risk to the investment portfolio is
interest rate risk associated with investments in fixed maturity securities.
the portfolio duration relative to the liabilities duration is primarily
managed through cash market transactions and treasury futures transactions.
the primary market risk for all of the companys debt
is interest rate risk at the time of refinancing. the company monitors the
interest rate environment and evaluates refinancing opportunities as maturity
dates approach. for additional information regarding the companys debt see
note 7 to the companys consolidated financial statements as well as the
liquidity and capital resources section of managements discussion and
analysis.
the companys foreign exchange market risk exposure is
concentrated in the companys invested assets and insurance reserves
denominated in foreign currencies. cash flows from the companys foreign
operations are the primary source of funds for the purchase of investments
denominated in foreign currencies. the company purchases these investments
primarily to fund insurance reserves and other liabilities denominated in the
same currency, effectively reducing its foreign currency exchange rate
exposure. invested assets denominated in the british pound sterling comprised
approximately 2.8% and 2.4% of the total invested assets at december31,
2006 and 2005, respectively. no other individual foreign currency accounted for
more than 1.8% of the companys invested assets at december31, 2006 or 2005.
there were no other
significant changes in the companys primary market risk exposures or in how
those exposures were managed for the year ended december31, 2006 compared
to the year ended december31, 2005. the company does not currently
anticipate significant changes in its primary market risk exposures or in how
those exposures are managed in future reporting periods based upon what is
known or expected to be in effect in future reporting periods.
sensitivity
analysis
sensitivity analysis is
defined as the measurement of potential loss in future earnings, fair values or
cash flows of market sensitive instruments resulting from one or more selected
hypothetical changes in interest rates and other market rates or prices over a
selected time. in the companys sensitivity analysis model, a hypothetical
change in market rates is selected that is expected to reflect reasonably
possible near-term changes in those rates. near-term means a period of time
going forward up to one year from the date of the consolidated financial
statements. actual results may differ from the hypothetical change in market
rates assumed in this disclosure, especially since this sensitivity analysis
does not reflect the results of any actions that would be taken by the company to
mitigate such hypothetical losses in fair value.
interest rate risk
in this sensitivity analysis model, the company uses
fair values to measure its potential loss. the sensitivity analysis model
includes the following financial instruments entered into for purposes other
than trading: fixed maturities, non-redeemable preferred stocks, mortgage
loans, short-term securities, debt and derivative financial instruments. the
primary market risk to the companys market sensitive instruments is interest
rate risk. the sensitivity analysis model uses a 100 basis point change in
interest rates to measure the hypothetical change in fair value of financial
instruments included in the model.
for invested assets with primary exposure to interest
rate risk, estimates of portfolio duration and convexity are used to model the
loss of fair value that would be expected to result from a parallel increase in
interest rates. durations on invested assets are adjusted for call, put and
interest rate reset features. durations on tax-exempt securities are adjusted
for the fact that the yields on such securities do not normally move in
lockstep with changes in the u.s. treasury curve. fixed maturity portfolio
durations are calculated on a market value weighted basis, including accrued interest,
using holdings as of december31, 2006 and 2005.
for debt, the change in fair value is determined by
calculating hypothetical december31, 2006 and 2005 ending prices based on
yields adjusted to reflect a 100 basis point change, comparing such hypothetical
ending prices to actual ending prices, and multiplying the difference by the
par or securities outstanding.
the sensitivity analysis model used by the company
produces a loss in fair value of market sensitive instruments of approximately
$2.3 billion and $2.2 billion based on a 100 basis point increase in interest
rates as of december31, 2006 and 2005, respectively.
the loss estimates do not
take into account the impact of possible interventions that the company might
reasonably undertake in order to mitigate or avoid losses that would result
from emerging interest rate trends. in addition, the loss value only reflects
the impact of an interest rate increase on the fair value of the companys
financial instruments. as a result, the loss value excludes a significant
portion of the companys consolidated balance sheet, which if included in the
sensitivity analysis model, would mitigate the impact of the loss in fair value
associated with a 100 basis point increase in interest rates.
foreign currency
exchange rate risk
the company uses fair values of investment securities
to measure its potential loss from foreign denominated investments. a
hypothetical 10% reduction in value of foreign denominated investments is used
to estimate the impact on the market value of the foreign denominated holdings.
the potential loss is reduced by foreign currency forward transactions that are
used to hedge a portion of the companys exposure to foreign currencies. the
companys analysis indicates that a hypothetical 10% reduction in the value of
foreign denominated investments would be expected to produce a loss in fair
value of approximately $438 million and $374 million at december31, 2006
and 2005, respectively.
item8. financial
statements and supplementary data
index
to consolidated financial statements
page
report of independent registered public accounting
firm
consolidated statement of income for the years ended
december31, 2006, 2005 and 2004
consolidated balance sheet at december31, 2006
and 2005
consolidated statement of changes in shareholders
equity for the years ended december31, 2006, 2005 and 2004
consolidated statement of cash flows for the years
ended december31, 2006, 2005 and 2004
notes to consolidated financial statements
report of
independent registered public accounting firm
the board of directors and stockholders
the st. paul travelers companies,inc.:
we have audited the accompanying consolidated balance
sheet of the st. paul travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries as of december31,
2006 and 2005, and the related consolidated statement of income, changes in
shareholders equity, and cash flows for each of the years in the three-year
period ended december31, 2006. these consolidated financial statements
are the responsibility of the companys management. our responsibility is to
express an opinion on these consolidated financial statements based on our
audits.
we conducted our audits in accordance with the
standards of the public company accounting oversight board (united states). those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable
assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material
misstatement. an audit includes examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting
the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements. an audit also includes
assessing the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by
management, as well as evaluating the overall financial statement presentation.
we believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
in our opinion, the consolidated financial statements
referred to above present fairly, in all material respects, the financial
position of the st. paul travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries as of december31,
2006 and 2005, and the results of their operations and their cash flows for
each of the years in the three-year period ended december31, 2006, in
conformity with u.s. generally accepted accounting principles.
we
also have audited, in accordance with the standards of the public company
accounting oversight board (united states), the effectiveness of the st. paul
travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries internal control over financial
reporting as of december31, 2006, based on criteria established in internal
controlintegrated framework issued by the committee of sponsoring
organizations of the treadway commission (coso), and our report dated february23,
2007 expressed an unqualified opinion on managements assessment of, and the
effective operation of, internal control over financial reporting.
/s/ kpmg llp
kpmg llp
minneapolis,
minnesota
february23, 2007
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and
subsidiaries
consolidated statement of income
(in millions, except per share data)
fortheyearendeddecember31,
revenues
premiums
$
20,760
$
20,341
$
19,038
net investment income
3,517
3,165
2,663
fee income
net realized
investment gains (losses)
(39
)
other revenues
total revenues
25,090
24,365
22,544
claims and expenses
claims and claim
adjustment expenses
12,244
14,927
15,439
amortization of
deferred acquisition costs
3,339
3,252
2,978
general and
administrative expenses
3,458
3,229
2,945
interest expense
total claims and expenses
19,365
21,694
21,598
income from continuing operations before income taxes
and minorityinterest
5,725
2,671
income tax
expense
1,517
minority
interest, net of tax
income from continuing operations
4,208
2,061
discontinued operations:
operating income (loss), net of taxes
(663
)
gain on disposal, net of taxes
income (loss) from discontinued operations
(439
)
net income
$
4,208
$
1,622
$
basic earnings per share
income from
continuing operations
$
6.12
$
3.04
$
1.42
income (loss)
from discontinued operations
(0.65
)
0.14
net income
$
6.12
$
2.39
$
1.56
diluted earnings per share
income from
continuing operations
$
5.91
$
2.95
$
1.40
income (loss)
from discontinued operations
(0.62
)
0.13
net income
$
5.91
$
2.33
$
1.53
weighted average number of
common shares outstanding:
basic
687.1
676.3
608.3
diluted
716.7
712.8
628.3
see notes to consolidated financial statements. 145
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and
subsidiaries
consolidated balance sheet
(in millions)
atdecember31,
assets
fixed maturities,
available for sale at fair value (including $1,674 and $2,667 subject to
securities lending) (amortized cost $62,244 and $58,616)
$
62,666
$
58,983
equity
securities, at fair value (cost $436 and $538)
real estate
short-term
securities
4,938
4,802
other investments
3,398
3,171
total investments
72,268
68,287
cash
investment income
accrued
premiums
receivable
6,181
6,124
reinsurance
recoverables
17,820
19,574
ceded unearned
premiums
1,243
1,322
deferred
acquisition costs
1,615
1,527
deferred tax
asset
1,536
2,062
contractholder
receivables
5,023
5,516
goodwill
3,438
3,442
intangible assets
other assets
2,587
3,318
total assets
$
113,761
$
113,187
liabilities
claims and claim
adjustment expense reserves
$
59,288
$
61,090
unearned premium
reserves
11,228
10,927
contractholder
payables
5,023
5,516
payables for
reinsurance premiums
debt
5,760
5,850
other liabilities
6,642
6,781
total liabilities
88,626
90,884
shareholders equity
preferred stock
savings planconvertible preferred stock (0.4 shares and 0.5 shares issued
and outstanding)
common stock
(1,750.0 shares authorized; 678.3 and 693.4 shares issued and outstanding)
18,530
18,096
retained earnings
7,253
3,750
accumulated other
changes in equity from nonowner sources
treasury stock,
at cost (25.2 and 1.2 shares)
(1,229
)
(47
)
total shareholders equity
25,135
22,303
total
liabilities and shareholders equity
$
113,761
$
113,187
see notes to consolidated financial statements. 146
the
st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries
consolidated statement of changes in shareholders equity
(in millions)
fortheyearendeddecember31,
convertible preferred
stocksavings plan
balance, beginning of year
$
$
$
preferred stock assumed at merger
redemptions during year
(24
)
(40
)
(26
)
balance, end of year
guaranteed
obligationstock ownership plan
balance, beginning of year
(5
)
obligations assumed at merger
(15
)
principal payments
balance, end of year
(5
)
total preferred shareholders equity
common
stock and additional paid-in capital
balance, beginning of year
18,096
17,331
8,685
net shares issued under employee share-based
compensation plans
compensation amortization under share-based plans and
other changes
shares issued pursuant to maturity of equity unit
forward contracts
shares issued for merger
8,608
adjustment for treasury shares cancelled and retired
at merger
(91
)
unvested equity-based awards assumed in merger
(43
)
balance, end of year
18,530
18,096
17,331
retained earnings
balance, beginning of year
3,750
2,744
2,290
net income
4,208
1,622
dividends declared
(701
)
(628
)
(529
)
minority interest and other
(4
)
balance, end of year
7,253
3,750
2,744
accumulated other changes in
equity from nonowner sources, net of tax
balance, beginning of year
1,086
change in net unrealized gain (loss) on investment
securities
(541
)
(192
)
change in minimum pension liability adjustment
(8
)
net change in unrealized foreign currency translation
and other changes
(52
)
adjustment to initially apply fas statement no. 158,
net of tax
(80
)
balance, end of year
treasury stock (at cost)
balance, beginning of year
(47
)
(14
)
(74
)
treasury shares acquiredshare repurchase program
(1,121
)
net shares acquired related to employee share-based
compensation plans
(61
)
(33
)
(31
)
treasury shares cancelled and retired at merger
balance, end of year
(1,229
)
(47
)
(14
)
total common shareholders equity
25,006
22,150
21,013
total shareholders equity
$
25,135
$
22,303
$
21,201
common shares outstanding
balance, beginning of year
693.4
670.3
435.8
net shares issued under employee share-based
compensation plans
7.7
7.9
5.2
common shares issued pursuant to maturity of equity
unit forward contracts
15.2
treasury shares acquiredshare repurchase program
(22.8
)
common shares assumed at merger
229.3
balance, end of year
678.3
693.4
670.3
summary of changes in equity
from nonowner sources
net income
$
4,208
$
1,622
$
other changes in equity from nonowner sources, net of
tax
(601
)
(134
)
total changes in
equity from nonowner sources
$
4,389
$
1,021
$
see notes to consolidated financial statements. 147
the st. paul
travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries
consolidated statement of cash flows
(in millions)
fortheyearendeddecember31,
cash flows from operating
activities
net income
$
4,208
$
1,622
$
adjustments
to reconcile net income to net cash provided by operating activities:
loss (income) from discontinued operations, net of
tax
(88
)
net realized investment (gains) losses
(11
)
(17
)
depreciation and amortization
deferred federal income tax (benefit) on continuing
operations
(280
)
amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs
3,339
3,252
2,978
premiums receivable
(57
)
reinsurance recoverables
1,998
(520
)
deferred acquisition costs
(3,427
)
(3,220
)
(2,948
)
claims and claim adjustment expense reserves
(2,565
)
2,032
3,473
unearned premium reserves
(383
)
(42
)
trading account activities
gain on redemption of subordinated debentures
(42
)
excess tax benefits from share-based payment
arrangements
(16
)
other
(288
)
(890
)
(467
)
net cash provided by operating activities of
continuing operations
4,774
3,589
5,066
net cash provided by operating activities of
discontinued operations
net cash provided by operating activities
4,774
3,613
5,241
cash flows from investing
activities
proceeds from maturities of fixed maturities
5,810
4,952
5,621
proceeds
from sales of investments:
fixed maturities
4,401
5,192
7,945
equity securities
real estate
purchases
of investments:
fixed maturities
(13,845
)
(16,046
)
(16,522
)
equity securities
(83
)
(63
)
(94
)
real estate
(75
)
(49
)
(22
)
short-term securities, (purchases) sales, net
(85
)
(1,913
)
other investments, net
securities transactions in course of settlement
(595
)
(1,108
)
net cash acquired in merger
other
(325
)
(132
)
net cash used in investing activities of
continuing operations
(3,064
)
(5,435
)
(4,647
)
net cash used in investing activities of
discontinued operations
(20
)
(139
)
net cash used in investing activities
(3,064
)
(5,455
)
(4,786
)
cash flows from financing
activities
issuance of debt
payment of debt
(806
)
(815
)
(227
)
dividends paid to shareholders
(702
)
(628
)
(642
)
issuance of common stock- employee share options
treasury stock acquiredshare repurchase program
(1,103
)
treasury stock acquirednet employee share-based
compensation
(17
)
(33
)
(23
)
excess tax benefits from share-based payment
arrangements
issuance of common stockmaturity of equity unit
forward contracts
repurchase of minority interest of subsidiary
(76
)
other
(3
)
net cash used in financing activities of
continuing operations
(1,593
)
(473
)
(516
)
net cash provided by (used in) financing
activities of discontinued operations
(24
)
net cash used in financing activities
(1,593
)
(469
)
(540
)
effect of exchange rate changes on cash
(5
)
elimination of cash provided by discontinued
operations
(8
)
(12
)
net proceeds from sale of discontinued operations
2,399
net increase (decrease) in cash
(90
)
cash at beginning of period
cash at end of period
$
$
$
supplemental disclosure of cash
flow information
income taxes paid
$
$
$
interest paid
$
$
$
see notes to consolidated financial statements. 148
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements
1. summary
of significant accounting policies
basis of
presentation
the consolidated financial statements include the
accounts of the st. paul travelers companies,inc. (together with its
subsidiaries, the company). on april1, 2004, travelers property casualty
corp. (tpc) merged with a subsidiary of the st. paul companies,inc.
(spc), as a result of which tpc became a wholly-owned subsidiary of the st.
paul travelers companies,inc. for accounting purposes, this transaction
was accounted for as a reverse acquisition with tpc treated as the accounting
acquirer. accordingly, this transaction was accounted for as a purchase
business combination, using tpcs historical financial information and applying
fair value estimates to the acquired assets, liabilities and commitments of spc
as of april1, 2004. beginning on april1, 2004, the results of
operations and financial condition of spc were consolidated with tpcs results
of operations and financial condition. accordingly, all financial information
presented herein for the twelve months ended december31, 2006 and 2005
reflects the consolidated accounts of spc and tpc. the financial information
presented herein for the twelve months ended december31, 2004 reflects
only the accounts of tpc for the three months ended march31, 2004 and the
consolidated accounts of spc and tpc for the nine months ended december31,
2004.
the preparation of the
consolidated financial statements in conformity with u.s. generally accepted
accounting principles (gaap) requires management to make estimates and
assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and
disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated
financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and claims and expenses
during the reporting period. actual results could differ from those estimates.
certain reclassifications have been made to prior years financial statements
to conform to the current years presentation, including reclassifications
related to the realignment of the companys reportable business segments
described in the nature of operations section of this note. all material
intercompany transactions and balances have been eliminated.
adoption of new
accounting standards
employers
accounting for defined benefit pension and other postretirement plans, an
amendment of fasb statements no.87, 88, 106 and 132(r)
in september2006,
the financial accounting standards board (fasb) issued statement of financial
accounting standards no.158, employers accounting for
defined benefit pension and other postretirement plans, an amendment of fasb
statements no.87, 88, 106 and 132(r)(fas 158). fas 158
requires an employer to recognize the funded status of a benefit plan as an
asset or liability in its statement of financial position, measured as the
difference between plan assets at fair value and the benefit obligation, and to
recognize as a component of accumulated other changes in equity from nonowner
sources, net of tax, actuarial gains or losses and prior service costs or
credits that arise during the period but which are not recognized as components
of net periodic benefit cost pursuant to fasb statement no.87, employers accounting for pensions (fas 87), or fasb
statement no.106, employers accounting for
postretirement benefits other than pensions (fas 106). the
provisions of fas 87 and fas 106 continue to apply in measuring plan assets and
benefit obligations, as of the date of the fiscal year-end statement of
financial position, and in determining the amount of net periodic benefit cost.
the provisions of fas 158 were effective for fiscal years ending after december15,
2006 and are not to be applied retrospectively. the companys adoption of fas
158 at december31, 2006 resulted in an $80 million reduction, net of tax,
to shareholders equity and is recognized as an adjustment to the ending
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
1. summary of significant accounting policies (continued)
balance
of accumulated other changes in equity from nonowner sources. the adoption of
fas 158 did not affect the companys results of operations or liquidity as fas
158 does not affect the determination of net periodic pension cost. see note
12.
considering the
effects of prior year misstatements when quantifying misstatements in current
year financial statements
in september2006, the staff of the securities
and exchange commission (sec) issued staff accounting bulletin no.108, considering the effects of prior year misstatements when quantifying
misstatements in current year financial statements (sab 108), as an
interpretation by the sec staff of the process of quantifying financial
statement misstatements for purposes of determining whether a misstatement is
material. sab 108 was issued to address diversity in practice used by
registrants in quantifying financial statement misstatements, and the potential
under the current practice for the build up of improper amounts on the balance
sheet. sab 108 requires registrants to quantify the impact of correcting all
misstatements, including both the carryover and reversing effects of prior year
statements, on the current year financial statements (i.e., the income
statement and the balance sheet). staff accounting bulletin no.99, materiality, which requires that both qualitative and
quantitative factors be evaluated in determining whether a misstatement is
material to the financial statements, is not affected by the issuance of sab
108.
sab 108 was effective for
the first interim period of the first fiscal year ending after november15,
2006, with early adoption encouraged. the adoption of sab 108 at december31,
2006 had no effect on the companys results of operations, financial condition
or liquidity.
share-based payment
in december2004, the fasb issued revised
statement of financial accounting standards no.123, share-based payment (fas 123r), an
amendment to fas 123, accounting for stock-based
compensation, and a replacement of accounting principles board
opinion no.25, accounting for stock
issued to employees, and its related implementation guidance. fas
123r requires public entities to measure the cost of employee services received
in exchange for an award of equity instruments based on the grant-date fair
value of the award and to recognize that cost over the requisite service
period.
fas 123r, which became effective january1, 2006,
requires entities that use the fair-value method of either recognition or
disclosure under fas 123 to apply a modified version of the prospective
application. under modified prospective application, compensation cost is
recognized on or after the effective date for all unvested awards, based on
their grant-date fair value as calculated under fas 123 for either recognition
or pro forma disclosure purposes.
in addition, the accounting for certain grants of
equity awards to individuals who are retirement-eligible on the date of grant
has been clarified. fas 123r states that an employees share-based award
becomes vested, for expensing purposes, at the date that the employees right
to receive or retain equity shares is no longer contingent on the satisfaction
of a market, performance or service condition. accordingly, awards granted to
retirement-eligible employees are not contingent on satisfying a service
condition and therefore are recognized at fair value on the date of the grant.
additionally, the period over which cost is recognized for awards granted to
those who become retirement-eligible before the vesting
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
1. summary of significant accounting policies (continued)
date will be from the
grant date to the retirement-eligible date rather than to the vesting date.
this guidance is to be applied prospectively to new or modified awards granted
upon adoption of fas 123r.
the adoption of fas 123r
at january1, 2006 using modified prospective application did not have a
material effect on the companys results of operations, financial condition or
liquidity. see note 11.
accounting changes
and error corrections
in may2005, the fasb
issued statement of financial accounting standards no.154, accounting changes and error corrections (fas 154),
which replaced apb opinion no.20, accounting changes, and fasb statement of
financial accounting standards no.3, reporting
changes in interim financial statements. fas 154 changed the
requirements for the accounting for and reporting of a change in accounting
principle. it requires retrospective application to prior period financial
statements of voluntary changes in accounting principle and changes required by
new accounting standards when the standard does not include specific transition
provisions, unless it is impracticable to do so. fas 154 was effective for
accounting changes and corrections of errors in fiscal years beginning after december15,
2005. early adoption was permitted for accounting changes and corrections of
errors made in fiscal years beginning after june1, 2005. it did not
change the transition provisions of any existing accounting pronouncements,
including those that were in a transition phase as of december15, 2005. the
adoption of fas 154 at january1, 2006 had no effect on the companys
results of operations, financial condition or liquidity.
the meaning of
other-than-temporary impairment and its application to certain investments
in november2005, the
fasb issued fasb staff position (fsp) fas 115-1 and fas 124-1, the meaning of other-than-temporary impairment and its application to
certain investments. the fsp addresses the determination as to when
an investment is considered impaired, whether that impairment is
other-than-temporary, and the measurement of an impairment loss. it requires
the establishment of a new cost basis subsequent to the recognition of an
other-than-temporary impairment and certain disclosures about unrealized losses
that have not been recognized as other-than-temporary impairments. the fsp is
effective for reporting periods beginning after december15, 2005. the
company had previously implemented these requirements. therefore, the adoption
of the fsp had no effect on the companys results of operations, financial
condition or liquidity.
american jobs
creation actrepatriation of foreign earnings
on october22, 2004,
congress enacted the american jobs creation
act (ajca) which provided a temporary incentive for u.s.
corporations to repatriate earnings previously reinvested in foreign
subsidiaries to obtain an 85% dividends received deduction. in december2004,
fsp no.109-2, accounting and
disclosure guidance for the foreign earnings repatriation provision within the
american jobs creation act of 2004 was issued. this fsp provides
accounting and disclosure guidance on how to apply fasb statement of financial accounting standards no.109,
accounting for income taxes, to
the repatriation provision of the ajca. in the fourth quarter of 2005, the company
approved a domestic reinvestment plan in accordance with the ajca to repatriate
foreign earnings prior to december31, 2005. in december2005, the
company repatriated $158 million of cumulative foreign earnings invested
outside of the united states, which resulted in an increase in income tax
expense of $8 million for the year ended december31, 2005.
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
1. summary of significant accounting policies (continued)
accounting
standards not yet adopted
accounting by
insurance enterprises for deferred acquisition costs in connection with
modifications or exchanges of insurance contracts
in september2005, the accounting standards
executive committee (acsec) issued statement of position 05-1, accounting by insurance enterprises for deferred acquisition costs in
connection with modifications or exchanges of insurance contracts
(sop 05-1). sop 05-1 provides guidance on accounting by insurance
enterprises for deferred acquisition costs on internal replacements of
insurance and investment contracts other than those specifically described in statement
of financial accounting standards no. 97, accounting
and reporting by insurance enterprises for certain long-duration contracts and
for realized gains and losses from the sale of investments. sop 05-1
defines an internal replacement as a modification in product benefits,
features, rights, or coverages that occurs by the exchange of a contract for a
new contract, or by amendment, endorsement, or rider to a contract, or by the
election of a feature or coverage within a contract.
sop 05-1 is
effective for internal replacements occurring in fiscal years beginning after december15,
2006, with earlier adoption encouraged. the adoption of sop 05-1
effective january1, 2007 did not have a material effect on the companys
results of operations, financial condition or liquidity.
accounting for
certain hybrid financial instruments
in february2006, the fasb issued statement of
financial accounting standards no.155, accounting
for certain hybrid financial instruments - an amendment of fasb statements no.133
and 140 (fas 155). fas
155 nullifies the guidance in the fasbs derivatives implementation group issue
d1 application of statement 133 to beneficial interests in securitized assets,
which had deferred the bifurcation requirements of statement of financial
accounting standards no.133, accounting for derivative
instruments and hedging activities (fas 133), for certain beneficial
interests in securitized financial assets. fas 155 requires beneficial
interests in securitized financial assets be analyzed to determine whether they
are freestanding derivatives or hybrid instruments that contain an embedded
derivative requiring bifurcation.
fas 155 permits entities to fair value any hybrid
financial instrument that contains an embedded derivative that otherwise would
require bifurcation. this election is on a contract-by-contract basis and is
irrevocable. additionally, fas 155 narrows the exception afforded to
interest-only strips and principal-only strips from derivative accounting. in addition, fas 155 clarifies that
concentrations of credit risk in the form of subordination are not embedded
derivatives and amends statement of financial accounting standards no.140,
accounting for transfers and servicing of financial
assets and extinguishments of liabilities - a replacement of fasb statement 125, to eliminate the restriction on the
passive derivative instruments a qualifying special purpose entity can hold.
in january2007, the fasb released statement 133
implementation issue no.b40, embedded derivatives:
application of paragraph 13(b)to securitized interests in prepayable
financial assets (b40). b40 provides a limited scope exception from
paragraph 13(b)of fas 133 for securitized interests that contain only an
embedded derivative that is tied to the prepayment risk of the underlying
prepayable financial assets and if both of the following criterion are met: (a)
the investor does not control the right to accelerate the settlement, and (b)the
securitized interest does not contain an embedded derivative for
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
1. summary of significant
accounting policies (continued)
which bifurcation would be
required other than an embedded derivative that results from embedded call
options in the underlying financial assets. b40 is effective upon the adoption
of fas 155, except for criterion (b)which is not applicable to
securitized interests issued before june30, 2007, and that only include
embedded derivatives that have an extremely remote possibility of having
greater than a trivial fair value during the life of the securitized interest.
fas 155 is effective for
all financial instruments acquired, issued or subject to a remeasurement (new
basis) event occurring after the beginning of an entitys fiscal year that
begins after september15, 2006. at adoption, for contracts where the fair
value option has been elected, any difference between the total carrying amount
of the individual components of the existing bifurcated hybrid financial
instrument and the fair value of the combined hybrid financial instrument
should be recognized as a cumulative-effect adjustment to beginning retained
earnings. the company adopted fas 155 effective january1, 2007. since it
did not elect the fair value option, it did not have a cumulative effect upon
adoption of fas 155. the ongoing effect of adopting fas 155 will not be
material to the companys results of operations, financial condition or liquidity.
accounting for
uncertainty in income taxes
in july2006, the fasb issued interpretation no.48,
accounting for uncertainty in income taxes - an interpretation
of fasb statement no.109 (fin 48). fin 48 clarifies the
accounting for uncertainty in income taxes recognized in a companys financial
statements and prescribes the recognition and measurement of a tax position
taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. fin 48 also provides guidance on
de-recognition, classification, interest and penalties, accounting in interim
periods, disclosure and transition.
under fin 48, evaluation of a tax position is a
two-step process. the first step is to determine whether it is
more-likely-than-not that a tax position will be sustained upon examination,
including the resolution of any related appeals or litigation based on the
technical merits of the position. the second step is to measure a tax position
that meets the more-likely-than-not threshold to determine the amount of
benefit to be recognized in the financial statements. a tax position is
measured at the largest amount of benefit that is greater than 50 percent
likely of being realized upon ultimate settlement.
tax positions that previously failed to meet the
more-likely-than-not recognition threshold should be recognized in the first
subsequent period in which the threshold is met. previously recognized tax
positions that no longer meet the more-likely-than-not criteria should be
de-recognized in the first subsequent financial reporting period in which the
threshold is no longer met.
in february2007, the fasb announced that it
plans to issue a fasb staff position (fsp) to amend fin 48. the proposed fsp is
expected to be exposed for a 30-day comment period and, if adopted, would
be effective at the time a company initially adopts fin 48.
fin 48 is effective for
fiscal years beginning after december15, 2006. the estimated impact of
adopting fin 48 at january1, 2007, before considering the impact, if any,
of the yet to be issued fsp, is not expected to have a material effect on the
companys results of operations, financial condition or liquidity.
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
1. summary of significant accounting policies (continued)
fair value
measurements
in september2006, the fasb issued statement of
financial accounting standards no.157, fair
value measurements (fas
157). fas 157 defines fair value, establishes a framework for measuring
fair value and expands disclosure about fair value measurements. it applies to
other pronouncements that require or permit fair value but does not require any
new fair value measurements. the statement defines fair value as the price
that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an
orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date.
fas 157 establishes a fair value hierarchy to increase
consistency and comparability in fair value measurements and disclosures. the
hierarchy is based on the inputs used in valuation and gives the highest
priority to quoted prices in active markets. the highest possible level should
be used to measure fair value.
fas 157 is effective for
fiscal years beginning after november15, 2007. the company does not
expect the provisions of fas 157 to have a material effect on its results of
operations, financial condition or liquidity.
endorsement
split-dollar life insurance arrangements
in september2006,
fasb issued emerging issues task force issue no.06-4, accounting for deferred compensation and postretirement benefit aspects
of endorsement split-dollar life insurance arrangements (eitf 06-4).
eitf 06-4 requires a company to recognize a liability and related
compensation expense for endorsement split-dollar life insurance policies that
provide a benefit to an employee that extends to postretirement periods. the
provisions of eitf 06-4 are effective for fiscal years beginning after december15,
2006. the adoption of eitf 06-4 effective january1, 2007 did not
have a material effect on the companys results of operations, financial
condition or liquidity.
fair value option
in february2007, the fasb issued statement of
financial accounting standards no.159, the fair value option for financial assets and
financial liabilities (fas
159). fas 159 permits an entity to irrevocably elect fair value on a
contract-by-contract basis as the initial and subsequent measurement attribute
for many financial assets and liabilities and certain other items including
property and casualty insurance contracts. entities electing the fair value
option would be required to recognize changes in fair value in earnings and to
expense upfront cost and fees associated with the item for which the fair value
option is elected. entities electing the fair value option are required to
distinguish on the face of the statement of financial position, the fair value
of assets and liabilities for which the fair value option has been elected and
similar assets and liabilities measured using another measurement attribute. an
entity can accomplish this by either reporting the fair value and
non-fair-value carrying amounts as separate line items or aggregate those
amounts and disclose parenthetically the amount of fair value included in the
aggregate amount.
fas 159 is effective for
fiscal years beginning after november15, 2007. upon adoption, an entity
is permitted to elect the fair value option irrevocably for any existing asset
or liability within the scope of the standard. the adjustment to reflect the
difference between the fair value and the carrying amount would be accounted
for as a cumulative-effect adjustment to retained earnings as of the date of
initial adoption.
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
1. summary of significant accounting policies (continued)
retrospective
application would not be permitted. the company is currently evaluating the
impact, if any, of fas 159 on its results of operations, financial condition
and liquidity.
accounting policies
investments
fixed maturities include bonds, notes and redeemable
preferred stocks. fixed maturities, including instruments subject to securities
lending agreements, are classified as available for sale and are reported at
fair value, with unrealized investment gains and losses, net of income taxes,
credited or charged directly to accumulated other changes in equity from
nonowner sources. equity securities, which include common and nonredeemable
preferred stocks, are classified as available for sale with changes in fair
value, net of income tax, charged or credited directly to accumulated other
changes in equity from nonowner sources.
the companys real estate investments include
warehouses, office buildings and other commercial land and properties that are
directly owned. real estate properties are carried at cost less accumulated
depreciation. buildings are depreciated on a straight-line basis over the
shorter of the expected useful life of the building or 39 years. accumulated
depreciation on real estate held for investment purposes was $82 million and
$48 million at december31, 2006 and 2005, respectively. real estate held
for sale is carried at the lower of cost or fair value less estimated costs to
sell.
short-term securities, consisting primarily of money
market instruments and other debt issues purchased with a maturity of less than
one year, are carried at amortized cost, which approximates fair value.
other investments include:
venture capital investments, through direct ownership and limited partnerships;
private equity limited partnerships; joint ventures; other limited
partnerships; mortgage loans and trading securities. certain venture capital
investments that are controlled by the company are consolidated in the companys
financial statements. the company uses the equity method of accounting for
joint ventures, limited partnerships and certain private equity securities.
mortgage loans are carried at amortized cost. trading securities are marked to
market with the change in fair value recognized in net investment income during
the current period.
valuation of
investments
fixed maturities
and equity securities
fixed maturities are valued based upon quoted market
prices or dealer quotes, or if quoted market prices or dealer quotes are not
available, discounted expected cash flows using market rates commensurate with
the credit quality and maturity of the investment. equity securities are valued
based on quoted market prices.
the following table identifies the fair value of fixed
maturity securities by pricing source at december31, 2006 and 2005.
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
1. summary of significant accounting policies (continued)
(inmillions)
fairvalue
%oftotalfair
value
fairvalue
%oftotalfair
value
priced via
independent market quotations
$
61,946
91.6
%
$
58,351
91.5
%
priced via broker
quotations
0.3
0.3
priced via
matrices
0.4
0.3
priced via other
methods
0.4
0.4
short-term
investments (1)
4,938
7.3
4,802
7.5
total
$
67,604
100.0
%
$
63,785
100.0
%
(1) short-term
investments are primarily valued at amortized cost, which approximates fair
value.
the fair value of a
financial instrument is the amount at which the instrument could be exchanged
in a current transaction between knowledgeable, unrelated willing parties. as
such, the estimated fair value of a financial instrument may differ
significantly from the amount that could be realized if the security was sold
immediately.
real estate
fair value is established
at the time of acquisition by internal analysis or external appraisers, using
discounted cash flow analyses and other acceptable techniques. the company had
no real estate held for sale at december31, 2006 or 2005.
venture capital investments
other investments include
venture capital investments, which are generally non-publicly traded
instruments in early-stage companies and, historically, have a holding period
of four to seven years. these investments have primarily been made in the
health care, software and computer services, and networking and information
technologies infrastructures industries. the company typically is involved with
venture capital companies early in their formation, as they are developing and
determining the viability of, and market demand for, their product. generally,
the company does not expect these venture capital companies to record revenues
in the early stages of their development, which can often take three to four
years, and does not generally expect them to become profitable for an even
longer period of time.
certain venture capital
investments that are controlled by the company are consolidated in the companys
financial statements. the underlying investments of these venture capital
investments are reported at estimated fair value. the fair value of the venture capital investments is based
on an estimate determined by the external fund manager and reviewed by the
company for investments in which there is no public market. the external fund
manager reviews such factors as recent filings, operating results, balance
sheet stability, growth, and other business and market sector fundamental
statistics in estimating fair values of specific investments.
with respect to the
companys valuation of such non-publicly traded venture capital investments, on
a quarterly basis, the companys portfolio managers and the external fund
manager review and consider a variety of factors in determining the valuation
of the investments and the potential for other-than-temporary impairments.
factors considered include the following:
the
investees most recent financing events;
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
1. summary of
significant accounting policies (continued)
an
analysis of whether a fundamental deterioration or improvement has occurred;
whether
the investees progress has been substantially more or less than expected;
whether
or not the valuations have improved or declined significantly in the investees
market sector;
whether
or not the external fund manager and the company believe it is probable that
the investee will need financing within six months at a lower price than our
carrying value; and
whether
or not the company has the ability and intent to hold the investment for a
period of time sufficient to allow for recovery, enabling it to receive value
equal to or greater than our cost.
the quarterly valuation
procedures described above are in addition to the portfolio managers ongoing
responsibility to frequently monitor developments affecting those invested
assets, paying particular attention to events that might give rise to
impairment write-downs.
non-publicly traded investments
the companys investment
portfolio includes non-publicly traded investments, such as venture capital
investments (as discussed above), private equity limited partnerships, joint
ventures, other limited partnerships, and certain fixed income securities. the
company uses the equity method of accounting for joint ventures, limited
partnerships and certain private equity securities. certain other private
equity investments, including venture capital investments are reported at
estimated fair value. these
non-publicly traded securities are valued based on factors such as management
judgment, recent financial information and other market data.
investment impairments
the company recognizes an
impairment loss when an invested assets value declines below cost, adjusted
for accretion, amortization and previous other-than-temporary impairments (new
cost basis), and the change is deemed to be other-than-temporary, or if it is
determined that the company will not be able to recover all amounts due
pursuant to the issuers contractual obligations prior to sale or maturity. when
the company determines that an invested asset is other-than-temporarily
impaired, the invested asset is written down to fair value and the amount of
the impairment is included in earnings as a realized investment loss. the fair
value then becomes the new cost basis of the investment and any subsequent
recoveries in fair value are recognized at disposition.
the company recognizes a
realized loss when impairment is deemed to be other-than-temporary even if a
decision to sell an invested asset has not been made. when the company has
decided to sell a temporarily impaired available-for-sale invested asset and
the company does not expect the fair value of the invested asset to fully
recover prior to the expected time of sale, the invested asset is deemed to be
other-than-temporarily impaired in the period in which the decision to sell is
made.
factors considered in
determining whether a decline is other-than-temporary include the length of
time and the extent to which fair value has been below cost, the financial
condition and near-term prospects of the issuer, and the companys ability and
intent to hold the investment for a period of time sufficient to allow for any
anticipated recovery.
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
1. summary of
significant accounting policies
(continued)
the companys process for
reviewing invested assets for impairments during any quarter includes the
following:
identification
and evaluation of investments that have possible indications of other-than-temporary
impairment, which includes an analysis of investments with gross unrealized
investment losses that have fair values less than 80% of cost for six
consecutive months or more;
review
of portfolio manager(s)recommendations for other-than-temporary
impairments based on the investees current financial condition, liquidity,
near-term recovery prospects and other factors;
consideration
of evidential matter, including an evaluation of factors or triggers that may
cause individual investments to qualify as having other-than-temporary
impairments; and
determination
of the status of each analyzed investment as other-than-temporary or not, with
documentation of the rationale for the decision.
sales of temporarily impaired invested assets
the company may, from time
to time, sell invested assets subsequent to the balance sheet date that were
considered temporarily impaired at the balance sheet date for several reasons. for
all subsequent sales of invested assets that were considered temporarily
impaired at the balance sheet date, the company contemporaneously documents its
rationale for its change in intent or ability to hold to recovery. the rationale for the change in the companys
ability and intent generally focuses on changes in the economic facts and
circumstances related to the invested asset subsequent to the balance sheet
date, significant unforeseen changes in the companys liquidity needs, or
changes in tax laws or the regulatory environment.
fixed maturities and equity securities
an investment in a fixed
maturity or equity security which is available for sale is impaired if its fair
value falls below its cost or new cost basis and the decline is considered to be
other-than-temporary. a fixed maturity security is other-than-temporarily
impaired if it is probable that the company will not be able to collect all
amounts due under the securitys contractual terms or where the company does
not have the intent to hold the security. equity securities are
other-than-temporarily impaired when it becomes apparent that the company will
not recover its cost over the expected holding period. further, for securities
expected to be sold, an other-than-temporary impairment charge is recognized if
the company does not expect the fair value of a security to recover prior to
the expected date of sale. additionally, for certain securitized financial
assets with contractual cash flows (including asset-backed securities), the
company periodically updates its best estimate of cash flows over the life of
the security. if management determines that the fair value of a securitized
financial asset is less than its carrying amount and there has been a decrease
in the present value of the estimated cash flows since the last revised
estimate, considering both timing and amount, then an other-than-temporary
impairment is recognized.
other investments
real estate investments
the carrying value of a
real estate property is reviewed for impairment when events or changes in
circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable. the
review for impairment includes an estimate of the undiscounted cash flows
expected to result from the use and eventual disposition of the real estate property.
an impairment loss is recognized if the expected future
undiscounted
cash flows are less than the carrying value of the real estate property. the
impairment loss is measured as the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds
fair value.
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
1. summary
of significant accounting policies (continued)
mortgage loans
a mortgage loan is
considered impaired when it is probable that the company will be unable to
collect principal and interest amounts due. for mortgage loans that are
determined to be impaired, a reserve is established for the difference between
the amortized cost and fair market value of the underlying collateral. in
estimating fair value, the company uses interest rates reflecting the current
real estate financing market returns. impaired loans were not material at december31,
2006 and 2005.
venture capital
investments and non-publicly traded investments
venture capital
investments and non-publicly traded investments are reviewed quarterly for
other-than-temporary impairment by the external fund manager and the companys
portfolio managers. an impairment loss is recognized if, based on the specific
facts and circumstances, it is probable that the company will not be able to
recover all of the cost of an individual holding. for a further discussion,
please see the venture capital investments and non-publicly traded investments sections under the valuation of
investments above.
net investment
income
investment income from fixed maturities and mortgage
loans is recognized based on the constant effective yield method including
estimated principal repayments, if any. the effective yield used to determine
amortization for fixed maturities subject to prepayment risk (e.g.,
asset-backed, loan-backed and structured securities) is recalculated and
adjusted periodically based upon actual historical and/or projected future cash
flows, which are obtained from a widely-accepted securities data provider. the
adjustments to the yield for highly rated prepayable fixed maturities are
accounted for using the retrospective method. the adjustments to the yield for
non-highly rated prepayable fixed maturities are accounted for using the
prospective method. dividends on equity
securities are recognized in income when declared. rental income on real estate
is recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease term. see note 3 for
further discussion. undistributed income for equity method investments is
reported in net investment income.
accrual of income is
suspended on fixed maturities or mortgage loans that are in default, or on
which it is likely that future payments will not be made as scheduled. interest
income on investments in default is recognized only as payment is received.
investments included in the consolidated balance sheet that were not income-producing
for the preceding 12 months were not material.
investment gains
and losses
net realized investment
gains and losses are included as a component of pretax revenues based upon
specific identification of the investments sold on the trade date. included in
net realized investment gains (losses) are other-than-temporary impairment
losses on invested assets as described above in the investment impairment
section above.
reinsurance
recoverables
amounts recoverable from
reinsurers are estimated in a manner consistent with the associated claim
liability. the company reports its reinsurance recoverables net of an allowance
for estimated uncollectible
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
1. summary of
significant accounting policies (continued)
reinsurance
recoverables. the allowance is based upon the companys ongoing review of
amounts outstanding, length of collection periods, changes in reinsurer credit
standing, disputes, applicable coverage defenses and other relevant factors. amounts
deemed to be uncollectible, including amounts due from known insolvent
reinsurers, are written off against the allowance for estimated uncollectible
reinsurance recoverables. any subsequent collections of amounts previously
written off are reported as part of claim and claim adjustment expenses. the
company evaluates and monitors the financial condition of its reinsurers under
voluntary reinsurance arrangements to minimize its exposure to significant
losses from reinsurer insolvencies.
deferred
acquisition costs
amounts which vary with
and are primarily related to the production of new insurance contracts,
primarily commissions and premium-related taxes, are deferred and amortized pro
rata over the contract periods in which the related premiums are earned.
deferred acquisition costs are reviewed to determine if they are recoverable
from future income and, if not, are charged to expense. future investment
income attributable to related premiums is taken into account in measuring the
recoverability of the carrying value of this asset. all other acquisition expenses
are charged to operations as incurred.
contractholder
receivables and payables
under certain workers
compensation insurance contracts with deductible features, the company is
obligated to pay the claimant for the full amount of the claim. the company is
subsequently reimbursed by the policyholder for the deductible amount. these
amounts are included on a gross basis in the consolidated balance sheet in
contractholder payables and contractholder receivables, respectively.
goodwill and other
intangible assets
a review is performed on at least an annual basis, of
goodwill held by the reporting units, which are the companys three operating
and reportable segments: business insurance; financial, professional&
international insurance; and personal insurance.
the impairment test is a two-step process. the first
step is to identify any potential impairment using a multiple-of-earnings
approach to estimate the fair value of the reporting units. the fair values of
the reporting units are then compared to their carrying value, including
goodwill. if the carrying amounts of the reporting units exceed their fair
value, a second step is performed to measure the amount of impairment, if any.
other intangible assets
that are not deemed to have an indefinite useful life are amortized over their
useful lives. the carrying amount of intangible assets that are not deemed to
have an indefinite useful life is regularly reviewed for indicators of
impairments in value. impairment is recognized only if the carrying amount of
the intangible asset is not recoverable from its undiscounted cash flows and is
measured as the difference between the carrying amount and the fair value of
the asset.
claims and claim
adjustment expense reserves
claims and claim adjustment expense reserves represent
estimates for both reported and unreported claims incurred and related
expenses. the reserves are adjusted regularly based upon experience. included
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
1. summary of
significant accounting policies (continued)
in the claims and claim
adjustment expense reserves in the consolidated balance sheet are certain
reserves discounted to the present value of estimated future payments. the
liabilities for losses for some long-term disability payments under workers
compensation insurance and workers compensation excess insurance, which
totaled $1.98 billion and $1.92 billion at december31, 2006 and 2005,
respectively, were discounted using a rate of 5% at december31, 2006 and
2005. reserves related to certain fixed and determinable asbestos-related
settlements, where all payment amounts and their timing are known, totaled $34
million at december31, 2005, and were discounted using a rate of 2.6% at
that date. there were no such reserves at december31, 2006. reserves for
certain assumed reinsurance business were discounted using a rate of 7% and a
range of rates from 5% to 7.5% at december31, 2006 and 2005,
respectively, and totaled $37 million and $79 million at december31, 2006
and 2005, respectively.
in determining claims and
claim adjustment expense reserves, the company performs a continuing review of
its overall position, its reserving techniques and its reinsurance. the
reserves are also reviewed periodically by qualified actuaries employed by the
company. these reserves represent the estimated ultimate cost of all incurred
claims and claim adjustment expenses. since the reserves are based on
estimates, the ultimate liability may be more or less than such reserves. the
effects of changes in such estimated reserves are included in the results of
operations in the period in which the estimates are changed. such changes may
be material to the results of operations and financial condition and could
occur in a future period.
securities lending
the company engages in
securities lending activities from which it generates net investment income
from the lending of certain of its investments to other institutions for short
periods of time. borrowers of these securities provide collateral equal to at
least 102% of the market value of the loaned securities plus accrued interest.
this collateral is held by a third-party custodian, and the company has the
right to access the collateral only in the event that the institution borrowing
the companys securities is in default under the lending agreement. therefore,
the company does not recognize the receipt of the collateral held by the
third-party custodian or the obligation to return the collateral. the loaned
securities remain a recorded asset of the company.
other liabilities
included in other liabilities in the consolidated
balance sheet is the companys estimate of its liability for guaranty fund and
other insurance-related assessments. the liability for expected state guaranty
fund and other premium-based assessments is recognized as the company writes or
becomes obligated to write or renew the premiums on which the assessments are
expected to be based. the liability for loss-based assessments is recognized as
the related losses are incurred. at december31, 2006 and 2005, the
company had a liability of $263 million and $278 million, respectively, for
guaranty fund and other assessments and related recoverables of $11 million and
$12 million, respectively. the liability for such assessments and the related
recoverables are not discounted for the time value of money. the assessments
are expected to be paid over a period ranging from one year to the life
expectancy of certain workers compensation claimants and the recoveries are
expected to occur over the same period of time.
also included in other
liabilities is an accrual for policyholder dividends. certain insurance
contracts, primarily workers compensation, are participating whereby dividends
are paid to policyholders in
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
1. summary of
significant accounting policies (continued)
accordance
with contract provisions. net written premiums for participating dividend
policies were approximately 1% of total company net written premiums for each
of the years ended december31, 2006, 2005 and 2004. policyholder
dividends are accrued against earnings using best available estimates of
amounts to be paid. the liability accrued for policyholder dividends totaled
$29 million and $30 million at december31, 2006 and 2005, respectively.
treasury stock
treasury stock represents
the cost of common stock repurchased by the company, which stock represents
authorized and unissued shares of the company under the minnesota business
corporation act.
statutory
accounting practices
the companys insurance
subsidiaries, domiciled principally in the states of connecticut and minnesota,
prepare statutory financial statements in accordance with the accounting
practices prescribed or permitted by the insurance departments of the states of
domicile. prescribed statutory accounting practices are those practices that
are incorporated directly or by reference in state laws, regulations, and
general administrative rulesapplicable to all insurance enterprises
domiciled in a particular state. permitted statutory accounting practices
include practices not prescribed by the domiciliary state, but allowed by the domiciliary
state regulatory authority. the impact of any permitted accounting practices on
statutory surplus of the company is not material.
premiums and
unearned premium reserves
premiums are recognized as revenues pro rata over the
policy period. unearned premium reserves represent the unexpired portion of
policy premiums. accrued retrospective premiums are included in premium
balances receivable. premium balances receivable are reported net of an
allowance for estimated uncollectible premium amounts.
ceded premiums are charged
to income over the applicable term of the various reinsurance contracts with
third party reinsurers. prepaid reinsurance premiums represent the unexpired
portion of premiums ceded to reinsurers and are reported as part of other assets.
reinsurance to close
under the accounting conventions used by lloyds
members, each underwriting account is normally kept open for three years and
the underwriting results determined at the end of the third year when the
account is closed, although a longer period may be required in order to
determine reserves at the required degree of accuracy/confidence for exposures
having significant uncertainty. when a year of account is closed, a reinsurance
contract (the reinsurance to close or ritc) is entered into with a subsequent
year of account (normally the following year of account) in consideration for
which all subsequent underwriting transactions resulting from the closing year
and all previous years reinsured therein are brought forward to (accept by) the
subsequent year of account. the ritc, which is calculated by the underwriter
and approved by the managing agent, comprises an estimate of all net
outstanding liabilities of the closing year and all previous years.
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
1. summary of
significant accounting policies (continued)
the amount of the assets received in an ritc is equal
to the accepted claims including incurred but not reported (ibnr) claims and is
undiscounted for the time value of money. accordingly, there is no gain or loss
at the time the assets and liabilities are acquired and recognized by the
subsequent year of account. in addition, there is no impact on reported
premiums and losses as a result of an ritc transaction.
in february2006,
following approval by the respective managing agencies, the 2003 and prior
years of account of lloyds syndicates 5000 and 779 closed through reinsurance
to close (ritc) into the 2004 year of account, for which the company is the
capital provider through its 100% ownership of lloyds members f&g uk
underwriters, ltd. and aprilgrange, ltd. the ritc was effective january1,
2006. the ritc resulted in the company acquiring $538 million of net claim and
claim adjustment expense reserves (net of $243million of reinsurance
recoverables), $470 million of investments, $29 million of cash and other net
assets during the first quarter of 2006. there was no impact on the companys
results of operations at the time the ritc was recorded.
fee income
fee income includes
servicing fees from carriers and revenues from large deductible policies and
service contracts and is recognized pro rata over the contract or policy
periods.
other revenues
other revenues include
revenues from premium installment charges, which are recognized as collected,
revenues of noninsurance subsidiaries other than fee income and gains and
losses on dispositions of assets and redemption of debt, and other
miscellaneous revenues.
income taxes
the company recognizes
deferred income tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax effects
attributable to temporary differences between the financial statement and tax
return bases of assets and liabilities, based on enacted tax rates and other
provisions of the tax law. the effect of a change in tax laws or rates on
deferred tax assets and liabilities is recognized in income in the period in
which such change is enacted. deferred tax assets are reduced by a valuation
allowance if it is more likely than not that all or some portion of the
deferred tax assets will not be realized.
foreign currency
translation
the company assigns
functional currencies to its foreign operations, which are generally the
currencies of the local operating environment. foreign currency amounts are
remeasured to the functional currency, and the resulting foreign exchange gains
or losses are reflected in earnings. functional currency amounts are then
translated into u.s. dollars. the change in unrealized foreign currency
translation gain or loss during the year, net of tax, is a component of
accumulated other changes in equity from nonowner sources. the foreign currency
remeasurement and translation are calculated using current exchange rates for
items reported in the balance sheets and average exchange rates for items
recorded in earnings.
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
1. summary of
significant accounting policies (continued)
share-based
compensation
the company has an employee stock incentive
compensation plan that permits grants of nonqualified stock options, incentive
stock options, stock appreciation rights, restricted stock, deferred stock,
stock units, performance awards and other stock-based or stock-denominated
awards with respect to the companys common stock.
the stock-based awards are measured at fair value on
the date of grant. stock option fair value is estimated by application of an
option pricing model, while restricted stock and deferred stock fair value is
measured at the market price of a share on the grant date.
the compensation cost for
awards subject to a service condition is based upon the number of equity
instruments for which the requisite service period is expected to be rendered.
awards granted to retiree-eligible or to employees that become retiree-eligible
before an awards vesting date are considered to have met the requisite service
condition. the compensation cost for awards subject to a performance condition
is based upon the probable outcome that the performance condition will be
achieved. the compensation cost reflects an estimated annual forfeiture rate of
5% over the requisite service period of the awards. that estimate is revised if
subsequent information indicates that the actual number of instruments expected
to vest is likely to differ from previous estimates. compensation cost for
awards are recognized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service
period. for awards that have a graded vesting schedule, the compensation cost
is recognized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period for
each separate vesting portion of the award as if the award was, in substance,
multiple awards.
derivative
financial instruments
the company may use derivative financial instruments,
including interest rate swaps, equity swaps, credit derivatives, options,
forward contracts and financial futures, as a means of hedging exposure to
interest rate, equity price change and foreign currency risk. the companys
insurance subsidiaries do not hold or issue derivative instruments for trading
purposes. the company recognizes all derivatives, including certain derivative
instruments embedded in other contracts, as either assets or liabilities in the
consolidated balance sheet and measures those instruments at fair value. where
applicable, hedge accounting is used to account for derivatives. for an
instrument to qualify as a hedge, the hedge relationship must be designated and
formally documented at inception, detailing the particular risk management
objective and strategy for the hedge, including the item and risk that is being
hedged, the derivative that is being used, and how effectiveness is being
assessed. a derivative must be highly effective in accomplishing the objective
of offsetting either changes in fair value or cash flows for the risk being hedged.
the effectiveness of these hedging relationships is evaluated on a
retrospective and prospective basis using quantitative measures of correlation.
if a hedge relationship is found to be ineffective, it no longer qualifies as a
hedge, and any excess gains or losses attributable to such ineffectiveness as
well as subsequent changes in fair value are recognized in net realized
investment gains (losses). the recognition of gains or losses on derivative
instruments that have been designated and qualify as a hedge depends upon
whether the derivative instrument is a fair value hedge, a cash flow hedge or a
foreign currency hedge.
derivatives that do not
qualify for hedge accounting are carried at fair value with the changes in fair
value reflected in the consolidated statement of income in net realized
investment gains (losses).
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
1. summary of
significant accounting policies (continued)
nature of
operations
the company is organized into three reportable
business segments: business insurance, financial, professional&
international insurance and personal insurance. in august2006, the
company announced a realignment of two of its three reportable business
segments. the former commercial and specialty segments were realigned into two
new reportable segments: the business insurance segment and the financial,
professional& international insurance segment. the personal segment
was renamed personal insurance. the changes were designed to reflect the manner
in which the companys businesses are currently managed and represent an
aggregation of products and services based on type of customer, how the
business is marketed and the manner in which risks are underwritten. the
following discussion reflects the realigned segment reporting structure, and
the financial data for prior periods presented has been reclassified to be
consistent with the new segment structure.
the specific business
segments are as follows:
business insurance
the business
insurance segment offers a broad array of property and casualty insurance and
insurance-related services to its clients primarily in the united states.
business insurance is organized into the following six groups, which
collectively comprise business insurance core operations:
select accounts serves small businesses for
property and casualty products, including commercial multi-peril, property,
general liability, commercial auto and workers compensation insurance.
commercial accounts serves primarily
mid-sized businesses for property and casualty products, including property,
general liability, commercial multi-peril, commercial auto and workers
compensation insurance. certain units included in commercial accounts prior to
the realignment are now included in the industry-focused underwriting, target
risk underwriting or specialized distribution groups.
national accounts comprises three business
units. the largest provides casualty products and services to large companies,
with particular emphasis on workers compensation, general liability and
automobile liability. national accounts also includes discover re, which
provides property and casualty insurance products on an unbundled basis using third-party administrators for insureds who
utilize programs such as collateralized deductibles, captive reinsurers and
self-insurance. in addition, national accounts includes the commercial residual
market business, which primarily offers workers compensation products and
services to the involuntary market.
industry-focused underwriting. the following business units
serve targeted industries with differentiated combinations of insurance
coverage, risk management, claims handling and other services:
construction serves a broad range of
construction businesses, offering guaranteed cost products for small to
mid-sized policyholders and loss sensitive programs for larger accounts. for
the larger accounts, the customer and the company work together in actively
managing and controlling exposure and claims and they share risk through policy
features such as deductibles or retrospective rating. products offered include
workers compensation, general liability and commercial auto coverages, and
other risk management solutions.
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
1. summary of
significant accounting policies (continued)
technology serves small to mid-sized
companies involved in telecommunications, information technology, medical
technology and electronics manufacturing, offering a well-balanced
comprehensive portfolio of products and services. these products include
property, commercial auto, general liability, workers compensation, umbrella,
internet liability, technology errors and omissions coverages and global
companion products.
public sector services markets insurance
products and services to public entities including municipalities, counties,
indian nation gaming and selected special government districts such as water
and sewer utilities. the policies written by this unit typically cover
property, commercial auto, general liability and errors and omissions
exposures.
oil& gas provides specialized
property and liability products and services for customers involved in the
exploration and production of oil and natural gas, including operators and
drilling contractors, as well as various service and supply companies and
manufacturers that support upstream operations. the policies written by this
business group insure drilling rigs, natural gas facilities, and production and
gathering platforms, and cover risks including physical damage, liability and
business interruption.
agribusiness serves small to medium-sized agricultural
businesses, including farms, ranches, wineries and related operations, offering
property and liability coverages other than workers compensation.
target risk underwriting. the following business units serve
commercial businesses requiring specialized product underwriting, claims
handling and risk management services:
national property serves large and mid-sized customers,
including retailers, hospitals, colleges and universities, and owners of
industrial parks, office buildings, apartments and amusement parks, covering
losses on buildings, business assets and business interruption exposures.
inland marine provides insurance for goods in transit and
movable objects for customers such as jewelers, museums, contractors and the
transportation industry. builders risk insurance is also offered to customers
during the construction, renovation or repair of buildings and other
structures.
ocean marine serves the marine
transportation industry and related services, as well as other businesses
involved in international trade. the companys product offerings fall under six
main coverage categories: marine liability, cargo, hull and machinery,
protection and indemnity, pleasure craft, and marine property and liability.
excess casualty serves small to mid-sized
commercial businesses, offering mono-line umbrella and excess coverage where
the company does not write the primary casualty coverage, or where other
business units within the company prefer to outsource the underwriting of
umbrella and excess business based on the expertise and/or limit capacity of
excess casualty.
boiler& machinery serves customers ranging from
small businesses to fortune 100 companies, offering comprehensive breakdown
coverages for equipment, including property and business interruption coverages.
through the boilerre unit, boiler&
machinery also serves other
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
1. summary of
significant accounting policies (continued)
property casualty carriers
that do not have in-house expertise with reinsurance, underwriting,
engineering, claim handling and risk management services for this type of
coverage.
global accounts provides insurance to u.s.
companies with foreign property and liability exposures (home-foreign), and
foreign organizations with property and liability exposures located in the
united states (reverse-flow), as part of a global program.
specialized distribution. the following business units
market and underwrite their products to customers predominantly through
licensed wholesale, general and program agents that manage customers unique
insurance requirements.
northland provides insurance coverage for the commercial
transportation industry, as well as commercial liability and package policies
for small, difficult to place specialty classes of commercial business on an
admitted or excess and surplus lines basis.
national programs offers tailored property and casualty
programs on an admitted basis for customers with common risk characteristics or
coverage requirements. programs available include those for entertainment,
architects and engineers, equipment rental and golf services.
underwriting facilities serves small commercial businesses,
offering general liability, property and
commercial auto physical damage coverages on an admitted or excess and surplus
lines basis.
business insurance also
includes the special liability group (which manages the companys asbestos and
environmental liabilities); the assumed reinsurance, health care, and certain
international and other runoff operations; policies written by the companys
gulf operation (gulf), which was placed into runoff during the second quarter
of 2004; and the companys personal catastrophe risk operation, which was sold
in november2005. the companys personal catastrophe risk business had
been included in the specialty segment prior to the august2006 segment
realignment. in accordance with the terms of the sale agreement, the company
retained responsibility for the pre-sale claims and claim adjustment expense reserves
related to the personal catastrophe risk operation and remains responsible for
any changes in estimates in those reserves through a quota-share reinsurance
agreement. these are collectively referred to as business insurance other. the
personal catastrophe risk operation accounted for the majority of net written
premiums in this category in 2005. in 2004, gulf and the personal catastrophe
risk operation accounted for the majority of written premiums in this category.
financial,
professional& international insurance
the financial,
professional& international insurance segment includes surety and
financial liability coverages, which require a primarily credit-based
underwriting process, as well as property and casualty products that are
primarily marketed on an international basis. the segment includes the
following groups:
bond& financial products provides
a wide range of customers with bond and insurance products and risk management
services. the range of coverages includes surety and fidelity bonds, for
construction and general commercial enterprises; professional liability and
management liability for public corporations, private companies and not-for-profit
organizations for losses caused by the negligence or misconduct of named
directors and officers; professional liability for a variety of professionals,
such
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
1. summary of
significant accounting policies (continued)
as lawyers, design
professionals and real estate agents for liability from errors and omissions
committed in the course of professional conduct or practice; and a full range
of property, auto, liability, fidelity and professional/management liability
insurance for financial institutions. this business represents the fourth
quarter 2006 combination of the companys previous bond
and financial& professional services
marketing groups.
in december2006, the company reached a
definitive agreement to sell its mexican surety subsidiary, afianzadora
insurgentes, s.a. de c.v., which accounted for $79 million of net written
premiums in 2006. the impact of this transaction will not be material to the
companys results of operations or financial condition.
international
and lloyds includes coverages marketed to and underwritten for
several customer groups within the united kingdom, canada and the republic of
ireland and business written as a corporate member at lloyds. international offers specialized insurance and risk
management services to several customer groups, including those in the
technology, public services, and financial and professional services industry
sectors. international primarily underwrites
employers liability (similar to workers compensation coverage in the united
states), public and product liability (the equivalent of general liability),
professional indemnity (similar to professional liability coverage), motor
(similar to automobile coverage in the united states) and property exposures. the
company underwrites four principal lines of businessaviation, marine, global
property, and accident and special risksthrough its lloyds syndicate
(syndicate 5000), for which the company provides 100% of the capital. during
the second half of 2004, the company made a decision to exit certain portions
of the lloyds personal lines business and, in early 2005, sold the right to
renew this business as well as the operating companies that supported it.
personal insurance
the personal insurance segment writes virtually all
types of property and casualty insurance covering personal risks. the primary
coverages in personal insurance are automobile and homeowners insurance sold to
individuals. these products are distributed through independent agents,
sponsoring organizations such as employee and affinity groups, and joint
marketing arrangements with other insurers.
automobile policies provide coverage for liability to
others for both bodily injury and property damage, and for physical damage to
an insureds own vehicle from collision and various other perils. in addition,
many states require policies to provide first-party personal injury protection,
frequently referred to as no-fault coverage.
homeowners policies are available for dwellings,
condominiums, mobile homes and rental property contents. protection against
losses to dwellings and contents from a wide variety of perils is included in
these policies, as well as coverage for liability arising from ownership or
occupancy.
in january2007, the
company reached a definitive agreement to sell its subsidiary, mendota
insurance company and its wholly-owned subsidiaries, mendakota insurance
company and mendota insurance agency,inc. these subsidiaries primarily
offered nonstandard automobile coverage and accounted for approximately $187 million
of net written premium volume in 2006. the sale is not expected to be material
to the companys results of operations or financial condition.
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
2. segment information
the company is organized into three reportable
business segments: business insurance; financial, professional&
international insurance; and personal insurance. the accounting policies used
to generate the following segment data are the same as those described in the
summary of significant accounting policies in note 1. the amount of investments
in equity method investees and total expenditures for additions to long-lived
assets other than financial instruments were not material.
the company allocates invested assets and the related
net investment income (nii) to its reportable business segments. pretax net
investment income is allocated based upon an investable funds concept, which
takes into account liabilities (net of non-invested assets) and appropriate
capital considerations for each segment. the investment yield for investable
funds reflects the duration of the loss reserves future cash flows, the
interest rate environment at the time the losses were incurred and a+ rated
corporate debt instrument yields. the investment yield for capital reflects the
average yield on the total investment portfolio. it is the application of the
yields to the segments investable funds and capital that determines the
respective business segments share of actual nii.
the cost of the companys catastrophe treaty program
is included in the companys ceded premiums and is allocated among reportable
business segments based on an estimate of actual market reinsurance pricing
using expected losses calculated by the companys catastrophe model, adjusted
for any experience adjustments. for hurricane katrina in 2005, the initial
allocation of reinsurance recoverables to the segments was based upon the best
estimate of segment incurred losses.
the following tables summarize the components of the
companys revenues, operating income (loss) and total assets by reportable
business segments. financial data for prior years presented in the tables was
reclassified to be consistent with the new segment structure implemented in
2006.
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
2.
segment information (continued)
(atandfortheyearendeddecember31,inmillions)
business
insurance
financial,
professional&
international
insurance
personal
insurance
total
reportable
segments
premiums
$
10,876
$
3,321
$
6,563
$
20,760
net investment
income
2,538
3,515
fee income
other revenues
total operating revenues(1)
$
14,049
$
3,776
$
7,205
$
25,030
amortization and
depreciation
$
2,109
$
$
1,282
$
4,160
income tax
expense
1,635
operating
income(1)
2,622
1,132
4,363
premiums
$
11,116
$
3,197
$
6,028
$
20,341
net investment
income
2,341
3,158
fee income
other revenues
total operating revenues(1)
$
14,184
$
3,578
$
6,581
$
24,343
amortization and
depreciation
$
2,053
$
$
1,141
$
3,958
income tax
expense
operating
income(1)
1,044
2,210
premiums
$
10,929
$
2,529
$
5,580
$
19,038
net investment
income
1,980
2,657
fee income
other revenues
total operating revenues(1)
$
13,675
$
2,781
$
6,113
$
22,569
amortization and
depreciation
$
1,446
$
$
$
2,968
income tax
expense (benefit)
(93
)
(181
)
operating income
(loss)(1)
(322
)
1,077
(1) operating revenues for
reportable business segments exclude net realized investment gains (losses) and
revenues from discontinued operations. operating income (loss) for reportable
business segments equals net income excluding the after-tax impact of net
realized investment gains (losses) and the after-tax impact of discontinued
operations.
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
2. segment
information (continued)
net written premiums by
market were as follows:
(fortheyearendeddecember31,inmillions)
business insurance:
select accounts
$
2,663
$
2,722
$
2,555
commercial accounts
2,376
2,330
2,273
national accounts
1,135
1,230
1,040
industry-focused underwriting
2,196
2,080
1,747
target risk underwriting
1,629
1,482
1,345
specialized distribution
1,022
total business insurance core
11,021
10,752
9,767
business insurance other
total business insurance
11,046
10,999
10,374
financial,
professional& international insurance:
bond& financial products
2,255
2,117
1,819
international and lloyds
1,138
1,042
total financial, professional&
international insurance
3,393
3,159
2,708
personal
insurance:
automobile
3,692
3,477
3,433
homeowners and other
3,019
2,751
2,496
total personal insurance
6,711
6,228
5,929
total
consolidated written premiums
$
21,150
$
20,386
$
19,011
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
2.
segment information (continued)
business segment reconciliations
(atandfortheyearendeddecember31,inmillions)
revenue reconciliation
earned premiums
business insurance:
commercial multi-peril
$
3,056
$
2,958
$
2,755
workers compensation
1,970
2,015
1,932
commercial automobile
1,999
2,144
2,081
property
1,901
1,860
1,934
general liability
1,929
2,075
2,085
other
total business insurance
10,876
11,116
10,929
financial, professional& international
insurance:
fidelity and surety
1,093
1,053
general liability
1,005
international
1,101
1,126
other
total financial,
professional& international insurance
3,321
3,197
2,529
personal insurance:
automobile
3,672
3,428
3,320
homeowners and other
2,891
2,600
2,260
total personal insurance
6,563
6,028
5,580
total earned premiums
20,760
20,341
19,038
net investment income
3,515
3,158
2,657
fee income
other revenues
total operating revenues
for reportable segments
25,030
24,343
22,569
interest expense and
other
net realized investment
gains (losses)
(39
)
total consolidated
revenues
$
25,090
$
24,365
$
22,544
income reconciliation, net of tax and minority
interest
total operating income
for reportable segments
$
4,363
$
2,210
$
1,077
interest expense and
other(1)
(163
)
(184
)
(182
)
total operating income
from continuing operations
4,200
2,026
net realized investment
gains (losses)
(28
)
total income from
continuing operations
4,208
2,061
discontinued operations
(439
)
total consolidated net income
$
4,208
$
1,622
$
(1) the
primary component of interest expense and other is after-tax interest expense
of $207 million, $186 million and $151 million in 2006, 2005 and 2004,
respectively. the 2006 total also reflects a $27 million after-tax gain on the
redemption of the companys $593 million, 7.60% subordinated debentures. see
note 7.
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
2.
segment information (continued)
(atdecember31,inmillions)
asset
reconciliation:
business insurance
$
86,640
$
87,188
financial, professional& international
insurance
13,265
11,908
personal insurance
13,294
12,710
total assets for reportable segments
113,199
111,806
other assets(1)
1,381
total consolidated
assets
$
113,761
$
113,187
(1) the
primary components of other assets in 2006 were accrued over-funded benefit
plan assets and deferred taxes, and in 2005 were invested assets, prepaid
pension costs and deferred taxes. beginning in 2006, the company allocated a
higher percentage of invested assets held at the parent company to its
reportable business segments to be consistent with the manner in which
management reviews segment results.
enterprise-wide
disclosures
revenues from internal customers for the years ended december31,
2006, 2005 and 2004 were not material. foreign assets at december31, 2006
and 2005 also were not significant. the company does not have revenue from
transactions with a single customer amounting to 10 percent or more of its revenues.
the
following table presents revenues of the companys operations based on
location:
(fortheyearendeddecember31,inmillions)
u.s.
$
23,588
$
22,908
$
21,640
non-u.s.
1,502
1,457
total revenues
$
25,090
$
24,365
$
22,544
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
3. investments
fixed maturities
the companys investment portfolio includes the fixed
maturities, equity securities, and other investments acquired in the merger at
their fair values as of the merger date. the fair value at acquisition became
the new cost basis for these investments.
the
amortized cost and fair value of investments in fixed maturities classified as
available for sale were as follows:
amortized
grossunrealized
(atdecember31,2006,inmillions)
cost
gains
losses
fairvalue
mortgage-backed
securities, collateralized mortgage obligations and pass-through securities
$
7,665
$
$
$
7,589
u.s. treasury
securities and obligations of u.s. governmentand government agencies
and authorities
2,736
2,718
obligations of
states, municipalities and political
subdivisions
35,326
35,907
debt securities
issued by foreign governments
1,550
1,552
all other
corporate bonds
14,866
14,784
redeemable
preferred stock
total
$
62,244
$
$
$
62,666
amortized
grossunrealized
(atdecember31,2005,inmillions)
cost
gains
losses
fairvalue
mortgage-backed
securities, collateralized mortgage obligations and pass-through securities
$
7,997
$
$
$
7,942
u.s. treasury
securities and obligations of u.s. governmentand government agencies
and authorities
3,458
3,441
obligations of
states, municipalities and political
subdivisions
31,372
31,822
debt securities
issued by foreign governments
1,583
1,588
all other
corporate bonds
14,098
14,069
redeemable
preferred stock
total
$
58,616
$
$
$
58,983
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
3.
investments (continued)
the amortized cost and
fair value of fixed maturities by contractual maturity follow. actual
maturities will differ from contractual maturities because borrowers may have
the right to call or prepay obligations with or without call or prepayment
penalties.
(atdecember31,2006,inmillions)
amortized
cost
fair
value
due in one year
or less
$
3,484
$
3,477
due after 1 year
through 5 years
13,161
13,173
due after 5 years
through 10 years
16,950
16,999
due after 10
years
20,984
21,428
54,579
55,077
mortgage-backed
securities
7,665
7,589
total
$
62,244
$
62,666
the company makes investments in collateralized
mortgage obligations (cmos) that typically have high credit quality, offer good
liquidity and are expected to provide an advantage in yield compared to u.s.
treasury securities. the companys investment strategy is to purchase cmo
tranches which offer the most favorable return given the risks involved. one
significant risk evaluated is prepayment sensitivity. the company does not
purchase residual interests in cmos.
at december31, 2006 and 2005, the company held
cmos classified as available for sale with a fair value of $3.56 billion and
$3.43 billion, respectively (excluding commercial mortgage-backed securities of
$1.07 billion and $1.16 billion, respectively). approximately 36% and 43% of
the companys cmo holdings are guaranteed by or fully collateralized by securities
issued by gnma, fnma or fhlmc at december31, 2006 and 2005, respectively.
in addition, the company held $4.36 billion and $4.83 billion of gnma, fnma,
fhlmc or fha mortgage-backed pass-through securities classified as available
for sale at december31, 2006 and 2005, respectively. virtually all of
these securities are rated aaa.
at december31, 2006 and 2005, the company had
$1.67 billion and $2.67 billion, respectively, of securities on loan as part of
a tri-party lending agreement. at december31, 2006 and 2005, respectively,
$0and $119 million of securities were subject to dollar-roll repurchase
agreements.
proceeds from sales of fixed maturities classified as
available for sale were $4.40 billion, $5.19 billion and $7.95 billion in 2006,
2005 and 2004, respectively. gross gains of $95 million, $129 million and
$202million and gross losses of $121 million, $118 million and $126
million were realized on those sales in 2006, 2005 and 2004, respectively.
at december31, 2006 and 2005, the companys insurance
subsidiaries had $4.44 billion and $4.00billion, respectively, of
securities on deposit at financial institutions in certain states pursuant to
the respective states insurance regulatory requirements.
the company has certain
subsidiaries that are required to hold investments in trust in conjunction with
its runoff reinsurance businesses. these trust funds had a fair value of $298
million and $374 million at december31, 2006 and 2005, respectively. additionally,
these subsidiaries have funds deposited with third parties to be used as
collateral to secure various liabilities on behalf of insureds, cedants and
other creditors. these funds had a fair value of $43 million at both december31,
2006 and 2005. the company also had $253 million of other investments pledged
as collateral securing outstanding letters of credit.
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
3.
investments (continued)
equity securities
the
cost and fair value of investments in equity securities were as follows:
grossunrealized
fair
(atdecember31,2006,inmillions)
cost
gains
losses
value
common stock
$
$
$
$
non-redeemable
preferred stock
total
$
$
$
$
grossunrealized
fair
(atdecember31,2005,inmillions)
cost
gains
losses
value
common stock
$
$
$
$
non-redeemable
preferred stock
total
$
$
$
$
proceeds from sales of
equity securities were $285 million, $403 million and $265 million in 2006,
2005 and 2004, respectively, resulting in gross realized gains of $29 million,
$43 million and $37 million and gross realized losses of $4 million, $9 million
and $8 million, respectively.
real estate
the companys real estate investments include
warehouses, office buildings, land, and other commercial real estate assets
that are directly owned. the company negotiates commercial leases with
individual tenants through unrelated, licensed real estate brokers. negotiated
terms and conditions include, among others, rental rates, length of lease
period and improvements to the premises to be provided by the landlord.
proceeds from the sale of real estate investments
totaled $37 million in 2005. gross gains of $15million were realized on
those sales, and no gross losses were recognized. the company did not sell any
real estate investments in 2006 or 2004.
future minimum rental
income expected on operating leases relating to the companys real estate
properties is $97 million, $85 million, $68 million, $53 million, $35 million,
and $51 million for 2007, 2008, 2009, 2010, 2011 and 2012 and thereafter,
respectively.
short-term
investments
short-term investments
consist primarily of money market instruments and other debt securities
purchased with a maturity of less than one year. the amortized cost of these
securities, which totaled $4.94billion and $4.80 billion at december31,
2006 and 2005, respectively, approximates their fair value.
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
3.
investments (continued)
other investments
venture capital. the cost and fair value of investments in venture
capital were as follows:
grossunrealized
fair
(atdecember31,2006,inmillions)
cost
gains
losses
value
venture capital
$
$
$
$
grossunrealized
fair
(atdecember31,2005,inmillions)
cost
gains
losses
value
venture capital
$
$
$
$
other. other investments also include private equity limited
partnerships, joint ventures, other limited partnerships, mortgage loans and
trading securities.
variable interest
entities (vies)
the following
entities are consolidated:
municipal
truststhe company owns interests in various municipal trusts that were formed
for the purpose of allowing more flexibility to generate investment income in a
manner consistent with the companys investment objectives and tax position. as
of december31, 2006 and 2005, there were 35 and 36 such trusts,
respectively, which held a combined total of $391 million and $441million,
respectively, in municipal securities, of which $76 million and $84 million,
respectively, were owned by outside investors. the net carrying value of the
trusts owned by the company at december31, 2006 and 2005 was $315 million
and $357 million, respectively.
the company has
significant interests in the following vies which are not consolidated because
the company is not considered to be the primary beneficiary:
the
company has a significant variable interest in two real estate entities. of
these two investments, one became a reportable vie in 2006 due to an increase
in the companys ownership interest. these investments have total assets of
approximately $305 million and $299 million as of december31, 2006 and
2005, respectively. the carrying value of the companys share of these
investments was approximately $33 million and $38 million at december31,
2006 and 2005, respectively. the company has an unfunded commitment of $12
million associated with one of these funds. the companys exposure to loss is
limited to the investment carrying amounts reported in the consolidated balance
sheet and the unfunded commitment amount. the purpose of the companys involvement
in these entities is to generate investment returns.
the
company has a significant variable interest in camperdown uk limited, which spc
sold in december2003. the companys variable interest resulted from an
agreement to indemnify the purchaser in the event a specified reserve
deficiency develops, a reserve-related foreign exchange impact occurs, or a
foreign tax adjustment is imposed on a pre-sale reporting period. the maximum
amount of this indemnification obligation is $187 million. the fair value of
this obligation as of december31, 2006 and 2005 was $65 million and $66
million, respectively. see guarantees section of note 15.
the company has other significant interests in
variable interest entities that are not material.
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
3.
investments (continued)
the following securities are not consolidated:
mandatorily redeemable
preferred securities of trusts holding solely the subordinated debentures of
the company - these securities were issued by four separate trusts that were
established for the sole purpose of issuing the securities to investors, and
are fully guaranteed by the company. the subordinated debt that the company
issued to these trusts is included in the debt section of liabilities on the
companys consolidated balance sheet. that debt had a carrying value of
$399million and $1.03 billion at december31, 2006 and 2005,
respectively. during 2006, the company redeemed the $593 million, 7.60%
subordinated debentures issued to st. paul capital trust i, which in turn
redeemed its preferred securities.
unrealized
investment losses
the
following tables summarize, for all investments in an unrealized loss position
at december31, 2006 and 2005, the aggregate fair value and gross
unrealized loss by length of time those securities have been continuously in an
unrealized loss position.
lessthan12months
12monthsorlonger
total
(atdecember31,2006,inmillions)
fair
value
gross
unrealized
losses
fair
value
gross
unrealized
losses
fair
value
gross
unrealized
losses
fixed maturities
mortgage-backed
securities, collateralized mortgage obligations and pass through securities
$
1,245
$
$
4,125
$
$
5,370
$
u.s. treasury
securities and obligations of u.s. government andgovernment agencies
and authorities
1,014
1,978
obligations of
states, municipalities and political subdivisions
4,468
4,077
8,545
debt securities
issued by foreign governments
1,267
all other
corporate bonds
3,690
6,325
10,015
redeemable
preferred stock
total fixed maturities
11,279
15,902
27,181
equity
securities
common stock
nonredeemable
preferred stock
total equity securities
venture capital
total
$
11,332
$
$
15,970
$
$
27,302
$
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
3.
investments (continued)
lessthan12months
12monthsorlonger
total
(atdecember31,2005,inmillions)
fair
value
gross
unrealized
losses
fair
value
gross
unrealized
losses
fair
value
gross
unrealized
losses
fixed maturities
mortgage-backed
securities, collateralized mortgage obligations and pass through securities
$
4,046
$
$
1,673
$
$
5,719
$
u.s. treasury
securities and obligations of u.s. government andgovernment agencies
and authorities
2,395
2,971
obligations of
states, municipalities and political subdivisions
9,524
2,331
11,855
debt securities
issued by foreign governments
all other
corporate bonds
4,971
3,652
8,623
redeemable
preferred stock
total fixed maturities
21,488
8,438
29,926
equity
securities
common stock
nonredeemable
preferred stock
total equity securities
venture capital
total
$
21,553
$
$
8,486
$
$
30,039
$
impairment
charges included in net realized investment gains (losses) were as follows:
(fortheyearendeddecember31,inmillions)
fixed maturities
$
$
$
equity securities
venture capital
other investments
(excluding venture capital)
total
$
$
$
concentrations and
credit quality
at december31, 2006 and 2005, the company had
concentrations of credit risk in tax-exempt investments of the state of texas
of $3.86 billion and $3.27 billion, respectively, of the state of california of
$2.10 billion and $1.54 billion, respectively, and of the state of illinois of
$1.93 billion and $1.84billion, respectively.
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
3. investments
(continued)
included in fixed maturities are below investment
grade assets totaling $1.78 billion and $1.75 billion at december31, 2006
and 2005, respectively. the company defines its below investment grade assets
as those securities rated below investment grade by external rating agencies,
or the equivalent by the companys investment advisors when a public rating
does not exist. such assets include publicly traded below investment grade
bonds and certain other privately issued bonds that are classified as below
investment grade loans.
the company monitors
creditworthiness of counterparties to financial instruments by using controls
that include credit approvals, limits and other monitoring procedures.
net investment income
(fortheyearendeddecember31,inmillions)
gross investment income
fixed maturities
$
2,738
$
2,530
$
2,128
equity securities
short-term
securities
real estate
other investments
gross investment income
3,580
3,238
2,768
investment
expenses
net investment
income
$
3,517
$
3,165
$
2,663
net realized and
unrealized investment gains (losses)
net
realized investment gains (losses) for the periods were as follows:
(fortheyearendeddecember31,inmillions)
net realized investment gains
(losses)
fixed maturities
$
(33
)
$
$
equity securities
venture capital
(4
)
other investments
(excluding venture capital)
(26
)
(13
)
(118
)
net realized
investment gains (losses)
$
$
$
(39
)
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
3. investments
(continued)
changes
in net unrealized gains (losses) on investment securities that are included as
a separate component of accumulated other changes in equity from nonowner
sources were as follows:
(atandfortheyearendeddecember31,inmillions)
change in net unrealized
investment gains (losses)
fixed maturities
$
$
(885
)
$
(315
)
equity securities
(4
)
(31
)
venture capital
other investments
(excluding venture capital)
(14
)
(852
)
(290
)
related taxes
(311
)
(98
)
change in net unrealized gains (losses) on
investment securities
(541
)
(192
)
balance,
beginning of year
1,060
balance, end of
year
$
$
$
4. reinsurance
the companys consolidated financial statements
reflect the effects of assumed and ceded reinsurance transactions. assumed
reinsurance refers to the acceptance of certain insurance risks that other
insurance companies have underwritten. ceded reinsurance involves transferring
certain insurance risks (along with the related written and earned premiums)
the company has underwritten to other insurance companies who agree to share
these risks. the primary purpose of ceded reinsurance is to protect the company,
at a cost, from volatility in excess of the amount it is prepared to accept.
reinsurance is placed on both a quota-share and excess of loss basis. ceded
reinsurance arrangements do not discharge the company as the primary insurer,
except for cases involving a novation.
the company evaluates and monitors the financial
condition of its reinsurers under voluntary reinsurance arrangements to
minimize its exposure to significant losses from reinsurer insolvencies. in
addition, in the ordinary course of business, the company may become involved
in coverage disputes with its reinsurers. some of these disputes could result
in lawsuits and arbitrations brought by or against the reinsurers to determine
the companys rights and obligations under the various reinsurance agreements.
the company employs dedicated specialists and strategies to manage reinsurance
collections and disputes.
the company is also required to participate in various
involuntary reinsurance arrangements through assumed reinsurance, principally
with regard to residual market mechanisms in workers compensation. the company
provides services for several of these involuntary arrangements (mandatory
pools and associations) under which it writes such residual market business
directly, then cedes 100% of this business to the mandatory pool. such
servicing arrangements are arranged to protect the company from any credit
risk, as any ceded balances are jointly backed by all the pool members.
the company assumed 100% of the workers compensation
premiums previously written by the accident department of its former affiliate,
the travelers insurance company.
certain of the assumed reinsurance contracts that the
company has entered into with non-affiliated companies on an excess of loss
basis do not transfer insurance risk. these contracts, which totaled
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
4.
reinsurance (continued)
$265million and $346
million at december31, 2006 and 2005, respectively, are accounted for
using deposit accounting and are included in other liabilities in the
consolidated balance sheet.
the
following is a summary of reinsurance financial data reflected in the
consolidated statement ofincome:
(fortheyearendeddecember31,inmillions)
written
premiums
direct
$
23,635
$
23,289
$
21,413
assumed
ceded
(2,889
)
(3,350
)
(3,247
)
total net written premiums
$
21,150
$
20,386
$
19,011
earned premiums
direct
$
23,280
$
23,370
$
21,551
assumed
1,007
ceded
(2,998
)
(3,531
)
(3,520
)
total net earned premiums
$
20,760
$
20,341
$
19,038
percentage
of assumed earned premiums to net earned premiums
2.3
%
2.5
%
5.3
%
ceded
claims and claim adjustment expenses incurred
$
2,158
$
3,601
$
3,175
reinsurance
recoverables include amounts recoverable on both paid and unpaid claims and
were asfollows:
(atdecember31,inmillions)
gross reinsurance
recoverables on paid and unpaid claims and claim adjustment expenses
$
12,837
$
14,177
allowance for
uncollectible reinsurance
(773
)
(804
)
net
reinsurance recoverables
12,064
13,373
structured
settlements
3,758
3,990
mandatory pools
and associations
1,998
2,211
total reinsurance recoverables
$
17,820
$
19,574
in 2004, the company
entered into commutation agreements with a major reinsurer, resulting in a
charge of $153 million for amounts received less than the reinsurance recoverable
balances of approximately $1.26 billion. in connection with the commutation,
the company also entered into a new reinsurance agreement effective april1,
2004, that provides $300 million aggregate coverage for the 2000accident
year exposures written by spc. because the new agreement is for events
occurring prior to the effective date of the agreement, it was considered
retroactive reinsurance and the resulting $59 million gain was deferred and
will be recognized in earnings as amounts are recovered from the reinsurer. through
december31, 2006, $11 million of the deferred gain was recognized in
earnings, all of which occurred in 2006. under the terms of these agreements,
the company received net cash of approximately $867 million in 2004.
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
4.
reinsurance (continued)
terrorism risk
insurance act of 2002 and terrorism risk insurance extension act of 2005
on november26, 2002, the terrorism risk
insurance act of 2002 (the terrorism act) was enacted into federal law and
established the terrorism risk insurance program (the program), a temporary
federal program in the department of the treasury, that provided for a system
of shared public and private compensation for insured losses resulting from
acts of terrorism or war committed by or on behalf of a foreign interest. the
program was scheduled to terminate on december31, 2005. in december2005,
the terrorism risk insurance extension act of 2005 (the terrorism extension
act) was enacted into federal law, reauthorizing the program through december31,
2007, while reducing the federal role under the program.
in order for a loss to be covered under the program
(subject losses), the loss must meet certain aggregate industry loss minimums
that vary by program year of amounts $100 million or less, and must be the result
of an event that is certified as an act of terrorism by the u.s. secretary of
the treasury. the original program excluded from participation certain of the
following types of insurance: federal crop insurance, private mortgage
insurance, financial guaranty insurance, medical malpractice insurance, health
or life insurance, flood insurance, and reinsurance. the terrorism extension
act exempted from coverage certain additional types of insurance, including
commercial automobile, professional liability (other than directors and
officers), surety, burglary and theft, and farm-owners multi-peril. in the
case of a war declared by congress, only workers compensation losses are
covered by the terrorism act and the terrorism extension act. both acts
generally require that all commercial property casualty insurers licensed in
the united states participate in the program. under the program, a
participating insurer is entitled to be reimbursed by the federal government
for a percentage of subject losses, after an insurer deductible, subject to an
annual cap. the federal reimbursement percentage is 85% in 2007.
the deductible is
calculated by applying the deductible percentage to the insurers direct earned
premiums for covered lines from the calendar year immediately preceding the
applicable year. the deductible under the program was 10% for 2004, 15% for
2005, 17.5% for 2006 and will be 20% for 2007. the companys estimated
deductible under the program is $2.20 billion for 2007. the annual cap limits
the amount of aggregate subject losses for all participating insurers to $100
billion. once subject losses have reached the $100 billion aggregate during a
program year, congress shall determine the source of funds, if any, available
for losses that exceed the $100 billion cap. the company had no
terrorism-related losses in 2006, 2005 or 2004. if the program is not renewed
for periods after january1, 2008, the benefits of the program will not be
available to the company, and the company will be subject to losses from acts
of terrorism subject only to the terms and provisions of applicable policies,
including policies written in 2007 for which the period of coverage extends
into 2008. given the unpredictable frequency and severity of terrorism losses,
as well as the limited terrorism coverage in the companys own reinsurance
program, future losses from acts of terrorism, particularly those involving
nuclear, biological, chemical or radiological events, could be material to the
companys operating results, financial condition and/or liquidity in future
periods, particularly if the program is not extended. regardless of whether the
terrorism act is extended, the company will continue to manage this type of
catastrophic risk by monitoring and controlling terrorism risk aggregations to
the best of its ability.
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
5. goodwill
and other intangible assets
goodwill
the
following table presents the carrying amount of the companys goodwill by
segment at december31, 2006 and 2005:
(atdecember31,inmillions)
business
insurance
$
2,168
$
2,168
financial,
professional& international insurance
personal
insurance
other
total
$
3,438
$
3,442
other intangible
assets
the following presents a summary of other intangible
assets by major asset class as of december31, 2006 and 2005:
(atdecember312006,inmillions)
gross
carrying
amount
accumulated
amortization
net
intangibles subject to
amortization
customer-related
$
1,036
$
$
marketing-related
fair value
adjustment on claims and claim adjustment expense reserves and reinsurance
recoverables(1)
(54
)
total intangible assets subject to amortization
1,247
intangible assets not subject
to amortization
contract-based
total intangible assets not subject to amortization
total intangible
assets
$
1,267
$
$
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
5. goodwill and other intangible assets
(continued)
(atdecember312005,inmillions)
gross
carrying
amount
accumulated
amortization
net
intangibles subject to amortization
customer-related
$
1,036
$
$
marketing-related
fair value adjustment on
claims and claim adjustment expense reserves and reinsurance recoverables(1)
(70
)
total intangible assets
subject to amortization
1,247
intangible assets not subject to amortization
contract-based
total intangible assets
not subject to amortization
total intangible assets
$
1,267
$
$
(1) the fair value
adjustment of $191 million was recorded in connection with the merger in 2004
and was based on managements estimate of nominal claim and claim expense
reserves and reinsurance recoverables (after adjusting for conformity with the
acquirers accounting policy on discounting of workers compensation reserves),
expected payment patterns, the april1, 2004 u.s. treasury spot rate yield
curve, a leverage ratio assumption (reserves to statutory surplus), and a cost
of capital expressed as a spread over risk-free rates. the method used
calculates a risk adjustment to a risk-free discounted reserve that will, if
reserves run off as expected, produce results that yield the assumed
cost-of-capital on the capital supporting the loss reserves. the fair value
adjustment is reported as an intangible asset on the consolidated balance
sheet, and the amounts measured in accordance with the acquirers accounting
policies for insurance contracts are reported as part of the claims and claim adjustment
expense reserves and reinsurance recoverables. the intangible asset will be
recognized into income over the expected payment pattern. because the time
value of money and the risk adjustment (cost of capital) components of the
intangible asset run off at different rates, the amount recognized in income
may be a net benefit in some periods and a net expense in other periods.
the
following presents a summary of the companys amortization expense for
intangible assets by major asset class:
(fortheyearendeddecember31,inmillions)
customer-related
$
$
$
marketing-related
fair value
adjustment on claims and claim adjustment expense reserves and reinsurance
recoverables
(12
)
(58
)
total amortization
expense
$
$
$
intangible asset amortization expense is estimated to
be $146 million in 2007, $126 million in 2008, $100 million in 2009, $86
million in 2010 and $69 million in 2011.
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
6. insurance claim reserves
claims
and claim adjustment expense reserves were as follows:
(atdecember31,inmillions)
property-casualty
$
59,202
$
61,007
accident and
health
total
$
59,288
$
61,090
the
table below is a reconciliation of beginning and ending property casualty
reserve balances for claims and claim adjustment expenses.
(atandfortheyearendeddecember31,inmillions)
claims and claim
adjustment expense reserves at beginning of year
$
61,007
$
58,984
$
34,474
less reinsurance
recoverables on unpaid losses
18,112
17,538
10,419
net reserves at beginning of year
42,895
41,446
24,055
estimated claims
and claim adjustment expenses for claims arising in the current year
12,533
14,450
12,855
estimated
increase (decrease) in claims and claim adjustment expenses for claims
arising in prior years
(429
)
2,399
acquisitions(1)
13,653
total increases
12,642
14,710
28,907
claims and claim adjustment
expense payments for claims arising in:
current year
4,279
4,227
3,998
prior years
8,632
8,871
7,553
total payments
12,911
13,098
11,551
unrealized
foreign exchange (gain) loss
(163
)
net reserves at end of year
42,844
42,895
41,446
plus reinsurance
recoverables on unpaid losses
16,358
18,112
17,538
claims and claim
adjustment expense reserves at end of year
$
59,202
$
61,007
$
58,984
(1) in february2006,
the 2003 and prior years of account of lloyds syndicates 5000 and 779 closed
through reinsurance to close into the 2004 year of account. see reinsurance to
close section of note 1. in 2004, acquired amount represents spc net claims
and claim adjustment expense reserves at the april1, 2004 acquisition
date. spc gross reserves at that date were $19.50 billion.
gross claim and claim adjustment expense reserves at
december 31, 2006 decreased by $1.80 billion from the same date in 2005,
primarily reflecting payments related to prior year hurricane losses, claim and
claim adjustment expense payments from runoff operations and favorable prior
year reserve development, primarily in the personal insurance segment,
partially offset by the impact of reserves acquired in the ritc transaction
described in note 1.
gross claims and claim adjustment expense reserves at
december 31, 2005 increased $2.02 billion over year-end 2004 as a result of the
impact of the significant catastrophe losses incurred in the third and fourth
quarters of 2005, and an increase to asbestos reserves pursuant to the
completion of the companys annual review of asbestos reserves in the fourth
quarter. those increases in reserves
were partially offset
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
6. insurance claim reserves (continued)
by claim and claim expense
payments from runoff operations and other net favorable prior year reserve
development.
the $1.75 billion decline in reinsurance recoverables
in 2006 primarily reflected significant reinsurance recoveries in related to
prior year hurricane losses, operations in runoff (primarily gulf) and various
commutation agreements, partially offset by the impact of reinsurance
recoverables acquired in the ritc transaction described above. in 2005, the
$574 million increase in reinsurance recoverables primarily resulted from
recoverables related to hurricane losses incurred.
the fair value adjustments
to the acquired claims and claim adjustment expense reserves and reinsurance
recoverables as of april1, 2004, the merger date, are reported as
intangible assets and are being amortized over the expected payout period of
the acquired reserves.
prior year reserve
development
the following disclosures regarding reserve
development are on a net of reinsurance basis.
2006.
in 2006, estimated claims and claim adjustment
expenses included $429 million of net favorable development for claims arising
in prior years, including $394 million of net favorable prior year reserve
development impacting the companys results of operations which excludes $62
million of accretion of discount.
business
insurance. net favorable prior year reserve
development totaled $21 million in 2006, primarily concentrated in the
commercial multi-peril, general liability, property and commercial automobile
lines of business, partially offset by increases for asbestos reserves and environmental
reserves that are discussed in more detail in the following asbestos and
environmental reserves section, as well as reserve strengthening for assumed
reinsurance business in runoff. the commercial multi-peril and liability lines
of business experienced better than anticipated loss development that was
attributable to several factors, including improving legal and judicial
environments, as well as enhanced risk control, underwriting and claim process
initiatives. the favorable prior year reserve development in the property line
of business primarily reflected less demand surge inflation than originally
estimated for 2005 accident year non-catastrophe related and catastrophe losses.
demand surge refers to significant short-term increases in building material
and labor costs due to a sharp increase in demand for those materials and
services. the commercial automobile line of business experienced better than
expected loss development which was attributable to the improved legal and
judicial environments, claim handling initiatives focused on the automobile
line of insurance and improvements in auto safety technology. the reserve
strengthening in assumed reinsurance was primarily due to changes in projected
loss development driven by an unanticipated change in the claim settlement
patterns of the underlying casualty exposures.
financial,
professional& international insurance. net
favorable prior year development in 2006 totaled $14 million.
personal insurance. net
favorable prior year reserve development in 2006 totaled $359 million, driven
by better than expected auto bodily injury loss experience and a decline in
non-catastrophe losses in the homeowners and other line of business, and a
reduction in loss estimates for the 2005 hurricanes. in the automobile line of
business, the improvement was partially driven by better than expected results
from
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
6. insurance claim reserves (continued)
changes in claim
handling practices. these changes included practices which have allowed case
reserves to be established more accurately earlier in the claim settlement
process, thereby changing historical loss development patterns. in addition,
industry and company initiatives to fight fraud in several states led to a
decrease in the total number of claims and a change in historical loss
development patterns. in the homeowners and other line of business, favorable
prior year reserve development was partially driven by a significant decrease
in the number of claims, attributable to changes in the marketplace, including
higher deductibles and fewer small-dollar claims. these changes also resulted
in a change in historical loss development patterns. in addition,
non-catastrophe homeowners and other loss experience was favorable due to
continued evidence of a less than expected impact from demand surge, which
refers to significant short-term increases in building material and labor costs
due to a sharp increase in demand for those materials and services. included in
net favorable prior year reserve development in 2006 was a reduction in loss
estimates for catastrophes incurred in 2005, primarily due to lower than
expected additional living expense losses related to hurricane katrina.
2005.
in 2005, estimated claims and claim adjustment
expenses for claims arising in prior years totaled a net $260 million,
including $325 million of net unfavorable prior year reserve development
impacting the companys results of operations which excludes $59 million of
accretion of discount. in 2005, estimated claims and claim adjustment expenses
for claims arising in prior years included $30 million of net favorable loss
development on business insurance loss sensitive policies in various lines;
however, since the business to which it relates was subject to premium
adjustments, there was no impact on results of operations.
business
insurance. net unfavorable prior year reserve
development in 2005 was $757 million, which included the asbestos and
environmental changes that are discussed in more detail in the following asbestos
and environmental reserves section, and reserve strengthening for assumed
reinsurance, which is in runoff. those increases were partially offset by
favorable prior year reserve development from lower frequency and severity for
both casualty and property-related lines of business. drivers of the reduction
in both frequency and severity were increasingly favorable legal and judicial environments, coupled with better than
expected results from changes in policy provisions as well as underwriting and
pricing criteria. company initiatives relating to claims handling, which
affected claims staffing and workflows, also are believed to have contributed
to the emergence of favorable severity experience in 2005.
financial,
professional & international insurance. net
favorable prior year reserve development totaled $72million in 2005,
attributable to the better than anticipated favorable impact from changes in
underwriting and pricing strategies for international property-related
exposures.
personal insurance. net
favorable prior year reserve development in 2005 totaled $360million. in
the automobile line of business, the improvement was driven by better than
expected results from changes in claim handling practices. these changes
included practices which have allowed case reserves to be established more
accurately earlier in the claim settlement process, thereby changing historical
loss development patterns. in addition, both industry and internal initiatives
to fight fraud in several states caused a decrease in the total number of
claims, as well as a change in the historical loss development patterns. in the
homeowners line of business, the improvement was driven primarily by a
significant decrease in the number of claims, attributable to changes in the
marketplace, including higher deductibles
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
6. insurance claim reserves (continued)
and fewer
small-dollar claims. these changes also resulted in a change in the historical
loss development patterns.
2004.
in 2004, estimated claims and claim adjustment
expenses for claims arising in prior years totaled a net $2.40 billion,
including $2.39 billion of net unfavorable prior year reserve development
impacting the companys results of operations, excluding $75 million of
accretion of discount. net unfavorable prior year reserve development included
$928 million to strengthen asbestos reserves, reserve adjustments related to
the merger of $500 million for construction and $300 million for surety, $290
million to strengthen environmental reserves, $252 million related to a
specific construction contractor, $113 million related to the commutation of
agreements with a major reinsurer, and other net reserving actions.
business
insurance. net unfavorable prior year reserve
development in 2004 totaled $2.03 billion, which included the asbestos and
environmental charges that are discussed in more detail in the following asbestos
and environmental reserves section. business insurance results in 2004 also
reflected a $500 million charge to strengthen construction reserves, a $174
million addition to the reserve for uncollectible reinsurance recoverables,
$150 million of net unfavorable prior year reserve development recorded in tpcs
construction operation prior to the merger, $74 million related to the
commutation of agreements with a major reinsurer, along with a strengthening of
gulf reserves, which was partially offset by favorable prior year reserve development
in several core business insurance operations due to lower frequency of
non-catastrophe related losses attributable to better underwriting and pricing
strategies in the prior year, the results of which emerged in the 2004 calendar
year.
financial,
professional& international insurance. net
unfavorable prior year reserve development totaled $739 million in 2004, which
included a $300 million charge to strengthen surety reserves, as well as a $252
million charge related to a specific construction contractor and $39 million
related to the commutation of agreements with a major reinsurer. results in
2004 also reflected a charge to increase the allowance for estimated
uncollectible amounts due from a co-surety on a specific construction
contractor claim.
personal
insurance. net favorable prior year reserve
development in 2004 was $378 million. in the homeowners line of business, the
improvement was driven by a significant decrease in the number of claims,
attributable to changes in the marketplace, including higher policy deductible
levels and fewer small dollar claims. these changes resulted in a change in the
historical loss development patterns. net favorable prior year reserve
development in the automobile line of business was driven by better than
expected frequency and severity which is believed to have been caused by societal
trends. in addition, both industry and internal initiatives to fight fraud in
several states caused a decrease in the total number of claims, as well as a
change in the historical loss development patterns.
for each of the years
ended december31, 2006, 2005 and 2004, changes in allocations between
accident years of loss adjustment expenses, pursuant to regulatory reporting
requirements, are included in claims and claim adjustment expenses for claims
arising in prior years and did not impact results of operations.
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
6. insurance claim reserves (continued)
asbestos and
environmental reserves
at december31, 2006 and 2005, the companys
claims and claim adjustment expense reserves included $4.47 billion and $4.79
billion, respectively, for asbestos and environmental-related claims, net of
reinsurance.
it is difficult to estimate the reserves for asbestos
and environmental-related claims due to the vagaries of court coverage
decisions, plaintiffs expanded theories of liability, the risks inherent in
complex litigation and other uncertainties, including without limitation, those
which are set forth below.
asbestos
reserves. because each policyholder presents
different liability and coverage issues, the company generally reviews the
exposure presented by each policyholder at least annually on a
policyholder-by-policyholder basis. in the course of this review, the company
considers, among other factors: available insurance coverage, including the
role of any umbrella or excess insurance the company has issued to the
policyholder; limits and deductibles; an analysis of each policyholders
potential liability; the jurisdictions involved; past and anticipated future
claim activity and loss development on pending claims; past settlement values
of similar claims; allocated claim adjustment expense; potential role of other
insurance; the role, if any, of non-asbestos claims or potential non-asbestos
claims in any resolution process; and applicable coverage defenses or
determinations, if any, including the determination as to whether or not an
asbestos claim is a products/completed operation claim subject to an aggregate
limit and the available coverage, if any, for that claim. for those
policyholders for which an estimate of the gross ultimate exposure for
indemnity and related claim adjustment expense is determined, the company
calculates, by each policy year, a ceded reinsurance projection based on any
applicable facultative and treaty reinsurance, past ceded experience and
reinsurance collections. conventional actuarial methods are not utilized to
establish asbestos reserves. the companys evaluations have not resulted in any
data from which a meaningful average asbestos defense or indemnity payment may
be determined.
the company also compares its historical gross and net
loss and expense paid experience, year-by-year, to assess any emerging trends,
fluctuations, or characteristics suggested by the aggregate paid activity. net
asbestos losses and expenses paid in 2006 were $469 million, compared with $399
million in 2005. the $70 million net increase is primarily the result of lower
reinsurance billings in 2006. approximately 50% in 2006 and 42% in 2005 of
total net paid losses relate to policyholders with whom the company previously
entered into settlement agreements limiting the companys liability. at december31,
2006, net asbestos reserves totaled $4.05 billion, compared with $4.36 billion
at december31, 2005.
the company recorded pre-tax asbestos reserve
additions of $155 million, $830 million and $928 million in 2006, 2005 and
2004, respectively, pursuant to the completion of its annual ground-up asbestos
exposure review, which included an analysis of exposure and claim payment
patterns by policyholder category, as well as recent settlements, policyholder
bankruptcies, judicial rulings and legislative actions. approximately half of
the $155 million 2006 pretax reserve adjustment was due to an increase in the
projected defense costs for ten policyholders. additionally, $15 million of the
pretax reserve adjustment was attributable to a delay in the approval and
expected payment of the previously announced settlement with ppg industries,inc.
as part of the pittsburgh corning bankruptcy reorganization plan. the remainder
of the reserve adjustment was primarily due to continued litigation activity
against smaller, peripheral defendants. the asbestos reserve addition in 2005
resulted, in part, from higher than expected defense costs due to increased
trial activity for seriously impaired plaintiffs and prolonged litigation
before cases are settled or dismissed. the 2005 reserve addition also
considered the january2006 court decision
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
6. insurance claim reserves (continued)
voiding, on procedural
grounds, the previously rendered favorable arbitration decision in the ongoing
acands litigation (described in more detail in note 15). the asbestos reserve
addition recorded in 2004 primarily resulted from an increase in litigation
costs and activity surrounding peripheral defendants.
as in prior years, the 2006 annual review considered
active policyholders and litigation cases, including cases challenging the
applicability of aggregate limits on asbestos claims. developing payment trends
among policyholders in the home office and field office as well as assumed and
international categories were also analyzed. the 2006 review of the home office
and field office categories, which account for the vast majority of the number
of policyholders, experienced an overall reduction in new claim filings as well
as in gross indemnity and defense payments over prior years.
the company has
recently observed the following developments in the asbestos environment:
the emergence of more stable payment trends
for a greater proportion of policyholders;
a decrease in the number of new claims
received;
a decrease in the number of large asbestos
exposures reflecting additional settlement activity;
a decrease in the number and volatility of
asbestos-related bankruptcies; and
the absence of new theories of liability or
new classes of defendants.
while there remains uncertainty with respect to future
exposure from asbestos claims, the company believes that the factors noted
above have led to a reduction in the overall volatility associated with its
asbestos exposure.
as a result of these favorable changes in the asbestos
environment, and in particular the emergence of more stable payment patterns,
beginning in 2007 the company is now able to supplement the existing annual
in-depth process and the existing quarterly asbestos review process with
additional aggregate quarterly reserve analyses. these additional analyses will
provide the company with an increased ability to detect and respond to emerging
trends, including reflecting any such trends in its quarterly reserve
estimates.
environmental
reserves. in establishing environmental
reserves, the company evaluates the exposure presented by each policyholder and
the anticipated cost of resolution, if any. in the course of this analysis, the
company considers the probable liability, available coverage, relevant judicial
interpretations and historical value of similar exposures. in addition, the
company considers the many variables presented, such as the nature of the
alleged activities of the policyholder at each site; the allegations of
environmental harm at each site; the number of sites; the total number of
potentially responsible parties at each site; the nature of environmental harm
and the corresponding remedy at each site; the nature of government enforcement
activities at each site; the ownership and general use of each site; the
overall nature of the insurance relationship between the company and the
policyholder, including the role of any umbrella or excess insurance the
company has issued to the policyholder; the involvement of other insurers; the
potential for other available coverage, including the number of years of
coverage; the role, if any, of non-environmental claims or potential
non-environmental claims, in any resolution process; and the applicable law in
each jurisdiction. conventional actuarial techniques are not used to estimate
these reserves.
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
6. insurance claim reserves (continued)
the company has continued to experience a decline in
the number of policyholders tendering claims for the first time. these
policyholders generally present smaller exposures, have fewer sites and are
lower tier defendants. further, regulatory agencies are utilizing risk-based
analysis and more efficient clean-up technologies. however, the company has
experienced higher than expected defense and settlement costs. these increases
have been driven in part by adverse judicial developments in certain states
regarding the availability of coverage for environmental claims. as a result of
these trends, the company increased environmental reserves by $120 million in
2006. in 2005, the company recorded a pretax charge of $30 million, primarily
for declaratory judgment costs. in 2004, the company recorded a pretax charge
of $290 million due to revised estimates of costs related to recent settlement
initiatives. the increases in environmental reserves in each year were net of
reinsurance. gross paid losses in 2006 and 2005 were $189 million and $248
million, respectively.
as a result of the processes and procedures described
above, management believes that the reserves carried for asbestos and
environmental claims at december31, 2006 are appropriately established
based upon known facts, current law and managements judgment. however, the
uncertainties surrounding the final resolution of these claims continue, and it
is difficult to determine the ultimate exposure for asbestos and environmental
claims and related litigation. as a result, these reserves are subject to
revision as new information becomes available and as claims develop. the
continuing uncertainties include, without limitation, the risks and lack of predictability
inherent in complex litigation, any impact from the bankruptcy protection
sought by various asbestos producers and other asbestos defendants, a further
increase or decrease in asbestos and environmental claims beyond that which is
anticipated, the role of any umbrella or excess policies the company has
issued, the resolution or adjudication of some disputes pertaining to the
amount of available coverage for asbestos and environmental claims in a manner
inconsistent with the companys previous assessment of these claims, the number
and outcome of direct actions against the company and future developments
pertaining to the companys ability to recover reinsurance for asbestos and
environmental claims. in addition, the companys asbestos-related claims and
claim adjustment expense experience has been impacted by the exhaustion or
unavailability due to insolvency of other insurance sources potentially
available to policyholders along with the insolvency or bankruptcy of other
defendants, although the company has noted a recent decrease in the number and
volatility of asbestos-related bankruptcies. it is also not possible to predict
changes in the legal and legislative environment and their impact on the future
development of asbestos and environmental claims. this development will be
affected by future court decisions and interpretations, as well as changes in
applicable legislation, including legislation related to asbestos reform. it is
also difficult to predict the ultimate outcome of large coverage disputes until
settlement negotiations near completion and significant legal questions are
resolved or, failing settlement, until the dispute is adjudicated. this is
particularly the case with policyholders in bankruptcy where negotiations often
involve a large number of claimants and other parties and require court
approval to be effective. as part of its continuing analysis of asbestos
reserves, which includes an annual ground-up review of asbestos policyholders,
the company continues to study the implications of these and other
developments. the company completed its most recent annual ground-up review
during the third quarter of 2006. see partiitem 3, legal proceedings.
asbestos
and environmental reserves. because of the
uncertainties set forth above, additional liabilities may arise for amounts in
excess of the current related reserves.
in addition, the companys estimate of claims and claim adjustment
expenses may change. these additional
liabilities or increases in
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
6. insurance claim reserves (continued)
estimates, or a range of
either, cannot now be reasonably estimated and could result in income statement
charges that could be material to the companys operating results in future
periods.
catastrophe
exposure
the company has geographic exposure to catastrophe
losses in certain areas of the country. catastrophes can be caused by various
natural and man-made events including hurricanes, windstorms, earthquakes,
hail, severe winter weather, explosions and fires. the incidence and severity
of catastrophes are inherently unpredictable. the extent of losses from a
catastrophe is a function of both the total amount of insured exposure in the
area affected by the event and the severity of the event. most catastrophes are
restricted to small geographic areas; however, hurricanes and earthquakes may
produce significant damage in larger areas, especially those that are heavily
populated. the company generally seeks to reduce its exposure to catastrophes
through individual risk selection and the purchase of catastrophe reinsurance.
there are also risks which impact the estimation of
ultimate costs for catastrophes. for
example, the estimation of reserves related to hurricanes can be affected by
the inability by the company and its insureds to access portions of the
impacted areas, the complexity of factors contributing to the losses, the legal
and regulatory uncertainties and the nature of the information available to
establish the reserves. complex factors
include, but are not limited to: determining whether damage was caused by
flooding versus wind; evaluating general liability and pollution exposures;
estimating additional living expenses; the impact of demand surge;
infrastructure disruption; fraud; the effect of mold damage and business
interruption costs; and reinsurance collectibility. the timing of a catastrophes occurrence,
such as at or near the end of a reporting period, can also affect the
information available to us in estimating reserves for that reporting period. the estimates related to catastrophes are
adjusted as actual claims emerge.
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
7. debt
debt
outstanding was as follows:
(atdecember31,inmillions)
short-term:
commercial paper
$
$
medium-term notes
maturing in following year
5.75% senior
notes due march15, 2007
5.01% senior
notes due august16, 2007
6.75% senior
notes due november15, 2006
total short-term debt
1,114
long-term:
3.75% senior
notes due march15, 2008
zero coupon
convertible notes due 2009
medium-term notes
with various maturities from 2008 through 2010
8.125% senior
notes due april15, 2010
7.81% private
placement notes due on various dates through 2011
5.00% senior
notes due march15, 2013
5.50% senior
notes due december1, 2015
6.25% senior
notes due june20, 2016
7.75% senior
notes due april15, 2026
7.625%
subordinated debentures due december15, 2027
8.47%
subordinated debentures due january10, 2027
4.50% convertible
junior subordinated notes payable due april15, 2032
6.375% senior
notes due march15, 2033
6.75% senior
notes due june20, 2036
8.50%
subordinated debentures due december15, 2045
8.312%
subordinated debentures due july1, 2046
7.60%
subordinated debentures due october15, 2050
5.75% senior
notes due march15, 2007
5.01% senior
notes due august16, 2007
total long-term debt
4,588
5,393
total debt principal
5,702
5,703
unamortized fair
value adjustment
unamortized debt
issuance costs
(51
)
(38
)
total debt
$
5,760
$
5,850
2006 debt issuancesin june2006,
the company issued $400 million aggregate principal amount of 6.25% senior
unsecured notes due june20, 2016 and $400 million aggregate principal
amount of 6.75% senior unsecured notes due june20, 2036. the notes were
issued at a discount, resulting in effective interest rates of 6.30% and 6.86%,
respectively. the notes pay interest semi-annually on june20 and december20
of each year, beginning december20, 2006, and rank equally with all of
the companys other senior unsecured indebtedness. either series of senior
notes is redeemable in whole or in part from time to time, at the companys
option, prior to maturity at a redemption price equal to the greater of: 100%
of the principal amount of senior notes to be redeemed; or the sum of the
present values of the remaining
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
7. debt
(continued)
scheduled payments
of principal and interest on the senior notes to be redeemed (exclusive of
interest accrued to the date of redemption) discounted to the date of
redemption on a semiannual basis (assuming a 360-day year consisting of
twelve 30-day months) at the then current treasury rate plus 20 basis
points for the 6.25% senior unsecured notes due june20, 2016 and 25 basis
points for the 6.75% senior unsecured notes due june20, 2036. net
proceeds from the issuances (after original issue discount and expenses) totaled
approximately $786 million.
2006 debt redemptions and
maturitiesin november2006, the company redeemed $593
million of 7.60% subordinated debentures originally issued in 2001 and due october15,
2050. the debentures were redeemable by the company on or after november13,
2006. in november2001, st. paul capital trust i, a business trust, issued
$575 million of preferred securities, the proceeds of which, along with $18
million in capital provided by the company, were used to purchase the
subordinated debentures issued by the company. upon the companys redemption of
its subordinated debentures in november2006, st. paul capital trust i in
turn used the proceeds to redeem its preferred securities. st. paul capital
trust i was then liquidated, and the company received an $18 million
distribution of capital. the company recorded a $42 million pretax gain on the
redemption of the subordinated debentures, representing the remaining
unamortized fair value adjustment recorded at the merger date. the gain was recorded
in other revenues on the consolidated statement of income. on november15,
2006, the companys $150 million, 6.75% senior notes matured. a portion of the
net proceeds from the june2006 debt issuances described above was also
used to fund this maturity.
2005 equity unit transactionin
2002, the company issued 8.9 million equity units, each of which initially
consisted of a forward purchase contract for the companys common stock, and an
unsecured $50 senior note of the company maturing in august2007. in may2005,
the company successfully remarketed the $442 million senior note component of
the equity units, resetting the annual interest rate from 5.25% to 5.01%. the
forward purchase contracts, which required the investor to purchase, for $50, a
variable number of shares of the companys common stock based on a specific
formula, settled in august2005. on the settlement date, the company
issued 15.2 million common shares and received total proceeds of $442 million.
description of debt
commercial
paperthe company maintains an $800 million commercial paper
program with $1 billion of back-up liquidity, consisting entirely of a bank
credit agreement. interest rates on commercial paper issued in 2006 ranged from
4.5% to 5.4%, and in 2005 ranged from 2.3% to 4.4%.
medium-term
notesthe medium-term notes outstanding at december31,
2006 bear interest rates ranging from 6.38% to 7.42%, with a weighted average
rate of 6.71%. maturity dates on remaining notes outstanding at december31,
2006 range from 2007 to 2010. during 2006 and 2005, medium-term notes having a
par value of $56 million and $99 million, respectively, matured.
senior notesthe
companys various senior debt issues are unsecured obligations that rank
equally with one another. interest payments are generally made semi-annually,
except for the 5.01% senior notes, for which interest payments are made
quarterly. the company generally may redeem some or all of the notes prior to
maturity in accordance with terms unique to each debt instrument.
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
7. debt
(continued)
zero
coupon convertible notesthe zero coupon convertible notes
mature in 2009, but are redeemable at the option of the company for an amount
equal to the original issue price plus accreted original issue discount. each
note is convertible at the option of the holder at any time on or prior to
maturity, unless previously redeemed by the company, into common stock of the
company at a conversion rate of 16.6433 shares for each $1,000 principal amount
of notes. if all notes outstanding at december31, 2006 were converted,
the company would issue 2.4 million of its common shares.
subordinated debenturesthe
companys four subordinated debenture instruments are all similar in nature. four
separate business trusts issued preferred securities to investors and used the
proceeds to purchase the companys subordinated debentures. interest on each of
the instruments is paid semi-annually. in january2007, the company
redeemed the $81 million, 8.47% subordinated debentures due in 2027. the
redemption was funded internally.
4.50%
convertible junior subordinated notesthese notes will mature
on april15, 2032, unless earlier redeemed, repurchased or converted.
interest is payable quarterly in arrears. the company has the option to defer
interest payments on the notes for a period not exceeding 20 consecutive
interest periods nor beyond the maturity of the notes. during a deferral
period, the amount of interest due to holders of the notes will continue to
accumulate, and such deferred interest payments will themselves accrue
interest. deferral of any interest can create certain restrictions for the
company. unless previously redeemed or repurchased, the notes are convertible
into shares of common stock at the option of the holders at any time after march27,
2003 and prior to april15, 2032 if at any time (1)the average of
the daily closing prices of common stock for the 20 consecutive trading days
immediately prior to the conversion date is at least 20% above the then
applicable conversion price on the conversion date, (2)the notes have
been called for redemption, (3)specified corporate transactions have
occurred, or (4)specified credit rating events with respect to the notes
have occurred. the notes will be convertible into shares of common stock at a
conversion rate of 0.4684 shares of common stock for each $25.00 principal
amount of notes (equivalent to an initial conversion price of $53.37 per share
of common stock), subject to adjustment in certain events. on or after april18,
2007, the notes may be redeemed at the companys option. the notes are general
unsecured obligations and are subordinated in right of payment to all existing
and future senior indebtedness. the notes are also effectively subordinated to
all existing and future indebtedness and other liabilities of any of the
companys current or future subsidiaries. if all notes outstanding at december31,
2006 were converted, the company would issue 16.7 million of its common shares.
the companys consolidated balance sheet includes the
debt instruments acquired in the merger, which were recorded at fair value as
of the acquisition date. the resulting fair value adjustment is being amortized
over the remaining life of the respective debt instruments using the
effective-interest method. the amortization of the fair value adjustment
reduced interest expense by $34 million and $54 million for the years ended december31,
2006 and 2005, respectively.
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
7. debt
(continued)
the following table
presents the unamortized fair value adjustment and the related effective
interest rate on the spc debt instruments acquired in the merger:
unamortizedfairvalue
purchaseadjustmentat
effective
interestrate
(inmillions)
issuerate
maturitydate
december31,2006
december31,2005
tomaturity
senior
notes
5.750
%
mar.2007
$
$
2.625
%
8.125
%
apr.2010
4.257
%
medium-term
notes
6.4%-7.4%
through2010
3.310
%
subordinated
debentures
7.625
%
dec.2027
6.147
%
8.470
%
jan.2027
7.660
%
8.500
%
dec.2045
6.362
%
8.312
%
jul.2046
6.362
%
7.600
%
oct.2050
7.057
%
zero
coupon convertible notes
4.500
%
mar.2009
4.175
%
total
$
$
on april1, 2004, the st. paul travelers
companies,inc. fully and unconditionally guaranteed the payment of all
principal, premiums, if any, and interest on certain debt obligations of its
subsidiaries tpc and travelers insurance group holdings inc. (tighi). the
guarantees pertain to the $400 million 3.75% notes due 2008, the $500 million
5.00% notes due 2013, the $200 million 7.75% notes due 2026, the $893 million
4.5% convertible notes due 2032 and the $500 million 6.375% notes due 2033.
maturitiesthe
amount of debt obligations, other than commercial paper, that become due in
each of the next five years is as follows: 2007, $1.10 billion; 2008, $552
million; 2009, $143 million; 2010, $273 million; and 2011, $2 million.
line of credit
agreement
in june2005, the
company entered into a $1.0 billion, five-year revolving credit agreement with
a syndicate of financial institutions. the new credit agreement replaced and
consolidated the companys three prior bank
credit agreements that had collectively provided the company access to $1.0
billion of bank credit lines. pursuant to covenants in the new credit
agreement, the company must maintain an excess of consolidated net worth over
goodwill and other intangible assets of not less than $10 billion at all times.
the company must also maintain a ratio of total consolidated debt to the
sum of total consolidated debt plus consolidated net worth of not greater than
0.40 to 1.00. in addition, the credit agreement contains other customary
restrictive covenants as well as certain customary events of default, including
with respect to a change in control. at december31, 2006, the company was
in compliance with these covenants and all other covenants related to its
respective debt instruments outstanding. pursuant to the terms of the credit
agreement, the company has an option to increase the credit available under the
facility, no more than once a year, up to a maximum facility amount of $1.5
billion, subject to the satisfaction of a ratings requirement and certain other
conditions. there was no amount outstanding under the credit agreement as of december31,
2006 or 2005.
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
7. debt
(continued)
shelf registration
in december2005, the
company filed with the securities and exchange commission a shelf registration
statement for the potential offering and sale of securities. the company may
offer these securities from time to time at prices and on other terms to be
determined at the time of offering. during 2006, the company issued senior debt
with a par value of $800 million (as described above) under this shelf
registration statement.
8. shareholders equity
and dividend availability
preferred stock
the companys preferred shareholders equity
represents the par value of preferred shares outstanding that the company
assumed in the merger related to the st. paul companies,inc. stock
ownership plan (sop) trust, less the remaining principal balance on the sop
trust debt. the sop trust borrowed funds from a u.s. underwriting subsidiary to
finance the purchase of the preferred shares, and the company guaranteed the
sop debt. the final payment on the sop debt was made in january2005.
the sop trust may at any time convert any or all of
the preferred shares into shares of the companys common stock at a rate of
eight shares of common stock for each preferred share. the board of directors
has reserved a sufficient number of authorized common shares to satisfy the
conversion of all preferred shares issued to the sop trust and the redemption
of preferred shares to meet employee distribution requirements. upon the
redemption of preferred shares, the company will issue shares of common stock
to the trust to fulfill the redemption obligations. see note 12. holders of the
preferred stock have a preference upon liquidation, dissolution or winding up
of the company of $100 per share.
in september2005,
the sop was merged into the st. paul travelers 401(k)savings plan (the
401(k)savings plan). see note 12.
common stock
the company is governed by the minnesota business
corporation act. all authorized shares of voting common stock have no par
value. shares of common stock reacquired are considered authorized and unissued
shares. the number of authorized shares of the company is 1.75 billion. the
articles of incorporation allow the company to issue five million undesignated
shares. the board of directors may designate the type of shares and set the
terms thereof. the board designated 1,450,000 shares as seriesb
convertible preferred stock in connection with the 401(k)savings plan.
on february6, 2007, the company, under the st.
paul travelers companies,inc. 2004 incentive plan, granted 1,678,215
common stock awards in the form of restricted stock units, deferred stock and
performance share awards to participating officers and other key employees. the
restricted stock units and deferred stock awards, totaling 1,097,720 shares,
generally vest in full after a three-year period from date of grant. the
performance share awards, totaling 580,495 target shares, represent shares
which the recipient may earn upon the companys attainment of certain
performance goals. the performance goals are based upon the companys adjusted
return on equity over a three-year performance period. vesting of any
performance shares is contingent upon the company attaining the relevant
performance period minimum threshold return on equity. if the performance
period return on equity is below the minimum threshold, none of the shares will
vest; if performance meets or exceeds the minimum performance
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
8.
shareholders equity and dividend availability (continued)
threshold, between 50%-160%
of the performance shares will vest, depending on the actual return on equity
attained. the fair value per share attributable to the common stock awards on
the date of grant was $52.76.
refer to note 11 for
information regarding share-based grants made in 2006, 2005 and prior years.
treasury stock
on may2, 2006, the companys board of directors
authorized a program to repurchase up to $2 billion of shares of the companys
common stock. under this program, repurchasesmay be madefrom time
to time in the open market, pursuant to pre-set trading plans meeting the
requirements of rule10b5-1 under the securities exchange act of
1934, in private transactions or otherwise. this program does not have a stated
expiration date. the timing and actual number of shares to be repurchased in
the future will depend on a variety of factors, including corporate and
regulatory requirements, price, catastrophe losses and other market conditions.
during 2006, the company repurchased 22.8 million common shares under the
program for a total cost of approximately $1.12 billion. the average cost per
share repurchased in 2006 was $49.20.
at december31, 2006, the company had $879
million of capacity remaining under the original $2 billion share repurchase
program approved by the board of directors in 2006. in january2007, the
companys board of directors authorized a $3 billion increase to the program.
the companys 2004 incentive plan, the legacy spc 1994
stock incentives plan and the legacy tpc 2002 incentive plan provide settlement
alternatives to employees in which the company repurchases shares to cover tax
withholding costs and exercise costs. during the years ended december31,
2006 and 2005, the company purchased $61 million and $33 million, respectively,
of its common stock under this plan.
common shares acquired are reported as treasury stock
in the consolidated balance sheet.
all shares of tpc common
stock that were held by the company as treasury stock at the merger date of april1,
2004, were cancelled and retired as of that date.
dividends
the companys insurance
subsidiaries are subject to various regulatory restrictions that limit the
maximum amount of dividends available to be paid to their parent without prior
approval of insurance regulatory authorities. a maximum of $3.07 billion is
available in 2007 for such dividends without prior approval of the connecticut
insurance department for connecticut-domiciled subsidiaries and the minnesota
department of commerce for minnesota-domiciled subsidiaries. the company
received $1.16 billion of dividends from its insurance subsidiaries in 2006.
statutory net
income and surplus
statutory net income of
the companys insurance subsidiaries was $4.27 billion, $2.92 billion, and
$1.58 billion for the years ended december31, 2006, 2005 and 2004,
respectively. statutory capital and surplus of the companys insurance
subsidiaries was $20.94 billion and $17.81 billion at december31, 2006
and 2005, respectively.
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
8.
shareholders equity and dividend availability (continued)
accumulated other
changes in equity from nonowner sources, net of tax
changes
in each component of accumulated other changes in equity from nonowner sources
were as follows:
(atandfortheyearendeddecember31,inmillions)
netunrealized
gains(losses)
oninvestment
securities
unamortized
benefitplan
costsand
minimum
pension
liability
adjustment(1)
other(2)
accumulated
otherchanges
inequityfrom
nonowner
sources
balance, december31, 2003
$
1,060
$
(6
)
$
$
1,086
net change in unrealized
gains on investment securities, net of tax benefit and minority interestof
$(85)
(168
)
(168
)
less: reclassification
adjustment for net realized gains included in net income, net of tax benefit
and minority interest of $(13)
(24
)
(24
)
change in other, net of
tax benefit of $(4)
current period change
(192
)
(134
)
balance, december31, 2004
(6
)
net change in unrealized
gains on investment securities, net of tax benefit and minority interestof
$(298)
(515
)
(515
)
less: reclassification
adjustment for net realized gains included in net income, net of tax benefit
and minority interest of $(13)
(26
)
(26
)
change in minimum pension
liability adjustment, net of tax benefit of $(4)
(8
)
(8
)
change in other, net of
tax of $3
(52
)
(52
)
current period change
(541
)
(8
)
(52
)
(601
)
balance, december31, 2005
(14
)
net change in unrealized
gains on investment securities, net of tax and minority
interest of $81
less: reclassification
adjustment for net realized gains included in net income, net of tax benefit
of $(11)
(20
)
(20
)
change in other, net of
tax benefit of $(5)
adjustment to initially
apply fas 158, net of tax benefit of $(43)
(80
)
(80
)
current period change
(80
)
balance, december31, 2006
$
$
(94
)
$
$
(1) activity in 2004 and
2005 was related to the companys minimum pension liability prior to the
application of fas 158. activity in 2006 represented the adjustment to
initially apply the provisions of fas 158.
(2) includes
foreign currency translation adjustments, changes in the value of private
equity securities, and hedging activities.
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
9. earnings per share
basic eps was computed by dividing income available to
common shareholders by the weighted average number of common shares outstanding
during the period. the computation of diluted eps reflected the effect of
potentially dilutive securities.
income from continuing operations per diluted share
for the year ended december31, 2004 excluded the weighted average effects
of the companys $893 million, 4.50% convertible junior subordinated notes
convertible into 16.7 million shares of the companys common stock, as the
impact would have been anti-dilutive.
the following is a
reconciliation of the income and share data used in the basic and diluted
earnings per share computations:
(fortheyearendeddecember31,inmillions,exceptpershareamounts)
basic
income from
continuing operations, as reported
$
4,208
$
2,061
$
preferred stock
dividends, net of taxes
(5
)
(6
)
(6
)
income from continuing operations available to
common
shareholdersbasic
$
4,203
$
2,055
$
diluted
income from
continuing operations available to common shareholders
$
4,203
$
2,055
$
effect of dilutive
securities:
convertible preferred stock
zero coupon convertible notes
convertible junior subordinated notes
equity unit stock purchase contracts
income from continuing operations available to
common
shareholdersdiluted
$
4,238
$
2,100
$
common shares
basic
weighted average
shares outstanding
687.1
676.3
608.3
diluted
weighted average
shares outstanding
687.1
676.3
608.3
weighted average effects
of dilutive securities:
stock options and other incentive plans
7.1
3.7
2.9
convertible preferred stock
3.4
4.2
3.8
zero coupon convertible notes
2.4
2.4
1.8
convertible junior subordinated notes
16.7
16.7
equity unit stock purchase contracts
9.5
11.5
total
716.7
712.8
628.3
income from continuing
operations per common share
basic
$
6.12
$
3.04
$
1.42
diluted
$
5.91
$
2.95
$
1.40
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
10. income
taxes
(fortheyearendeddecember31,inmillions)
composition of income tax
expense (benefit) included in consolidated statement of income
current expense
(benefit) on continuing operations:
federal
$
$
(18
)
$
foreign
state
total current tax expense on continuing operations
1,016
deferred expense
(benefit) on continuing operations:
federal
(280
)
foreign
(20
)
state
total deferred tax expense (benefit) on continuing
operations
(245
)
tax expense on income from continuing operations
1,517
tax expense
included in discontinued operations
total income tax
expense included in consolidated statement of income
1,517
1,461
composition
of income tax benefit included in common shareholders equity
benefit relating
to stock-based compensation, the change in unrealized appreciation on
investments, unrealized loss on foreign exchange and unrealized loss on
derivatives, and other comprehensive income
(7
)
(333
)
(117
)
total income tax
expense included in consolidated financial statements
$
1,510
$
1,128
$
effective
tax rate
income from
continuing operations before federal, foreign and state incometaxes and
minority interest
$
5,725
$
2,671
$
statutory tax
rate
%
%
%
expected federal income tax expense
2,004
tax effect of:
nontaxable investment income
(421
)
(371
)
(284
)
foreign operations
(50
)
other, net
(16
)
(1
)
(12
)
total income tax
expense on income from continuing operations before minority interest
$
1,517
$
$
effective tax rate on
income from continuing operations before minority interest
%
%
%
the current income tax
payable was $252 million and $142 million at december31, 2006 and 2005,
respectively, and is included in other liabilities in the consolidated balance
sheet.
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
10.
income taxes (continued)
the net deferred tax asset
comprises the tax effects of temporary differences related to the following
assets and liabilities:
(atdecember31,inmillions)
deferred
tax assets
claims and claim
adjustment expense reserves
$
1,488
$
1,615
unearned premium
reserves
alternative
minimum tax credit carryforward
other
total gross deferred tax assets
2,900
3,339
less valuation allowance
net deferred tax assets
2,818
3,241
deferred tax liabilities
deferred
acquisition costs
investments
intangible assets
internally-developed
software
other
total gross deferred tax liabilities
1,282
1,179
total deferred
income taxes
$
1,536
$
2,062
if the company determines that any of its deferred tax
assets will not result in future tax benefits, a valuation allowance must be
established for the portion of these assets that are not expected to be
realized. the net decreases in the valuation allowance for deferred tax assets
were $16 million and $30 million at december31, 2006 and 2005,
respectively, relating in each year to foreign operations. based upon a review
of the companys anticipated future taxable income, and also including all
other available evidence, both positive and negative, the companys management
concluded that it is more likely than not that the net deferred tax assets will
be realized.
for tax return purposes, as of december31, 2006,
the company had a u.s. net operating loss (nol) carryforward that expires, if
unused, in 2017-2018. the amount and timing of realizing the benefit of
nol carryforwards depends on future taxable income and limitations imposed by
tax laws. the approximate amounts of those nols on a regular tax basis and an
alternative minimum tax (amt) basis were $103million and $70 million,
respectively. the benefit of the nol carryforward has been recognized in the
consolidated financial statements.
the companys intercompany tax sharing agreement was
amended to include the spc companies effective with their acquisition on april1,
2004.
u.s. income taxes have not been provided on $245
million of the companys foreign operations undistributed earnings as of december31,
2006, as such earnings are intended to be permanently reinvested in those
operations. furthermore, any taxes paid to foreign governments on these
earnings may be used as credits against the u.s. tax on any dividend
distributions from such earnings.
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
10.
income taxes (continued)
on october22, 2004,
congress enacted the american jobs creation act
(ajca), which provided a temporary incentive for u.s. corporations to
repatriate earnings previously reinvested in foreign subsidiaries to obtain an
85% dividends received deduction. in december2005, the company
repatriated $158 million of cumulative foreign earnings invested outside of the
united states, which resulted in an increase in income tax expense of $8
million for the year ended december31, 2005.
11. share-based incentive compensation
the company has a share-based incentive compensation
plan, the st. paul travelers companies,inc. 2004 stock incentive plan
(the 2004 incentive plan), which was adopted in july2004 following the
merger of spc and tpc. the purposes of the 2004 incentive plan are to reward
the efforts of the companys non-employee directors, executive officers and
other employees and to attract new personnel by providing incentives in the
form of stock-based awards. the 2004 incentive plan permits grants of nonqualified
stock options, incentive stock options, stock appreciation rights, restricted
stock, deferred stock, stock units, performance awards and other stock-based or
stock-denominated awards with respect to the companys common stock. the number
of shares of the companys common stock authorized for grant under the 2004
incentive plan is 35 million shares, subject to additional shares that may be
available for awards as described below.
in connection with the adoption of the 2004 incentive
plan, the legacy share-based incentive compensation plans of tpc and of spc were terminated. outstanding
grants were not affected by the termination of these plans, including the grant
of reload options related to prior option grants under the legacy tpc and the
legacy spc share-based incentive compensation plans.
the 2004 incentive plan is the only plan pursuant to
which future stock-based awards may be granted. in addition to the 35 million
shares initially authorized for issuance under the 2004 incentive plan, the
following will not be counted towards the 35 million shares available and will
be available for future grants under the 2004 incentive plan: (i)shares
of common stock subject to an award that expires unexercised, that is
forfeited, terminated or canceled, that is settled in cash or other forms of
property, or otherwise does not result in the issuance of shares of common
stock, in whole or in part; (ii)shares that are used to pay the exercise
price of stock options and shares used to pay withholding taxes on awards
generally; and (iii)shares purchased by the company on the open market
using cash option exercise proceeds; provided, however, that the increase in
the number of shares of common stock available for grant pursuant to such
market purchases shall not be greater than the number that could be repurchased
at fair market value on the date of exercise of the stock option giving rise to
such option proceeds. these provisions also apply to awards granted under the
legacy tpc and legacy spc share-based incentive compensation plans that were
outstanding on the effective date of the 2004 incentive plan, except for shares
delivered to or retained in the legacy tpc plan in connection with the
withholding of taxes applicable to the exercise of outstanding options that
have reload features.
the company also has a
compensation program for non-employee directors (the 2004 director compensation
program). under the 2004 director compensation program, non-employee directors
compensation consists of an annual retainer and a deferred stock award. each
non-employee director may choose to receive all or a portion of his or her
annual retainer and any committee chair or co-chair fees paid in the form of
cash, common stock or deferred stock. deferred stock for the annual retainer,
and committee chair and co-chair fees, is elected pursuant to the st. paul
travelers deferred compensation
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
11.
share-based incentive compensation (continued)
plan for
non-employee directors that the board adopted after the merger and is vested
upon grant. the annual deferred stock awards vest one year after the date of
award. any of the deferred stock awards may accumulate until distribution at a
future date or upon termination of a directors service. the shares of the
companys common stock issued under the 2004 director compensation program,
including shares of deferred stock, are awarded under the 2004 incentive plan.
stock option awards
stock
option awards granted to eligible officers and key employees were granted
having a ten-year term. prior to january1, 2007, stock options were
granted with an exercise price equal to the fair market value of the companys
common stock on the day preceding the date of grant. beginning january1,
2007, all stock options are granted with an exercise price equal to the fair
market value of the companys common stock on the date of grant. the stock
options granted generally vest upon meeting certain years of service criteria.
except as the compensation committee of the board may allow in the future,
stock options cannot be sold or transferred by the participant. the vesting
terms for stock options granted under the 2004 incentive plan and the legacy
tpc and legacy spc plans are generally as follows:
period option granted
option award vesting terms
options vest at end of 3-year
period (cliff vest)
april2004 through
options vest over
4-year period, 50% on 2ndanniversary of the date of grant, and 25% of
the option shares vest on each of the 3rdand 4thanniversaries of the grant date. certain
2005 special option shares vest 50% on each of the 4thand 5thanniversaries
of the grant date.
prior to april2004
options vest over 4-year
period, 25% each year on the anniversary of the grant date; or options vest
over 5-year period, 20% each year on the anniversary of the grant date.
in addition to the regular stock option awards
described above, certain stock option awards that were granted under the legacy
share-based incentive plans of tpc and spc permit an employee exercising an
option to be granted a new option (a reload option) at an exercise price equal
to the fair market value of the company common stock on the day preceding the
reload grant. the legacy tpc reload option is permitted on the stock option
awards granted prior to january2003 at an amount equal to the number of
shares of the common stock used to satisfy both the exercise price and
withholding taxes due upon exercise of an option and vest six months after the
grant date and are exercisable for the remaining term of the related original
option. the legacy spc reload option is permitted on stock option awards
granted between february2002 and november2003 in an amount equal to
the number of shares of the common stock used to satisfy both the exercise
price and withholding taxes due upon exercise of an option and vest one year
after the grant date and are exercisable for the remaining term of the related
original option.
the fair value of each
option award is estimated on the date of grant by application of a variation of
the black-scholes option pricing model using the assumptions noted in the
following table. the expected term of newly granted stock options is the time
to vest plus half the remaining time to expiration. this considers the vesting
restriction and represents an even pattern of exercise behavior over the
remaining term. reload options are exercisable for the remaining term of the original
option and therefore would
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
11.
share-based incentive compensation (continued)
generally
have a shorter expected term. the expected volatility is based on the average
historical volatility of the common stock of an industry peer group of
entities, due to the limited company stock history, over the estimated option
term based on the mid-month of the option grant. the expected dividend is based
upon the companys current quarter dividend annualized and assumed to be
constant over the expected option term. the risk-free interest rate for each
option is the interpolated market yield for the mid-month of the option grant
on a u.s. treasury bill with a term comparable to the expected option term of
the granted stock option. shares received through option exercises under the
reload program are subject to restriction on sale. a 10% discount, as measured
by the estimated cost of protection, has been applied to the fair value of
reload options granted to reflect these sales restrictions. the following
assumptions were used in estimating the fair value of options on grant date for
the year ended december31, 2006:
originalgrants
reloadgrants
expected term of
stock options
5  7 years
1  4 years
expected
volatility of the companys stock
22.6%  32.
0%
15.9%  30.
4%
weighted average
volatility
30.3
%
18.0
%
expected annual
dividend per share
$
0.92 -
$1.0
$
0.92 -
$1.0
risk free rate
4.30%  5.10
%
4.30%  5.17
%
the
significant assumptions used in estimating the fair value on the date of the
grant for original options and reload options granted in 2005 and 2004 and for
the awards assumed on april1, 2004 from spc at the merger were as
follows:
expected life of
stock options
6 years
3years
expected
volatility of the companys stock
32.0
%
32.1
%
risk-free
interest rate
3.96
%
2.50
%
expected annual
dividend per share
$
0.89
$
0.88
expected annual
forfeiture rate
%
%
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
11.
share-based incentive compensation (continued)
a summary of stock option
activity under the companys 2004 incentive plan and the legacy tpc and legacy
spc share-based incentive compensation plans as of and for the year ended december31,
2006 is as follows:
stockoptions
number
weighted
average
exercise
price
weighted
average
contractual
life
remaining
aggregate
intrinsic
value
($inmillions)
outstanding,
beginning of year
43,864,909
$
41.81
granted:
original
2,681,979
44.79
reload
884,886
49.44
exercised
(6,409,647
)
36.08
forfeited or
expired
(2,041,719
)
47.16
outstanding, end
of year
38,980,408
$
42.84
5.0 years
$
vested at end of year(1)
30,987,534
$
43.22
4.3
years
$
exercisable at end of
year
29,032,741
$
43.26
4.1 years
$
(1) represents awards for
which the requisite service has been rendered including those that are
retirement eligible.
the
following table presents additional information regarding original and reload
grants for the year ended december31, 2006.
originalgrants
reloadgrants
weighted average
grant-date fair value of options granted (pershare)
$
13.60
$
4.94
total intrinsic value of
options exercised during the year (inmillions)
$
$
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
11.
share-based incentive compensation (continued)
the following table
presents the weighted average exercise price and weighted average grant date
fair value information with respect to option awards granted in 2005 and 2004:
options
weighted
average
exercise
price
weighted
average
grant
datefair
value
original
awards
exercise price equal to market at grant
4,961,029
$
37.78
$
9.10
original
awards
exercise price equal to market at grant
1,881,158
$
40.97
$
9.27
exercise price exceeds market at grant
350,188
$
62.79
$
6.42
assumed
awards
exercise price exceeds market at grant
13,287,228
$
45.13
$
7.58
exercise price less than market at grant
9,762,575
$
31.88
$
12.40
total granted
25,281,149
$
39.95
$
9.55
in connection with the
merger in april2004, the company assumed 23 million outstanding spc stock
options, of which 4 million remained unvested and assumed approximately 240,000
of outstanding spc restricted stock awards related to spc equity-based
compensation plans. these stock options and restricted stock awards retained
the same terms and conditions that were applicable prior to the merger. at april1,
2004, the estimated fair values of the unvested stock option awards and the
restricted stock awards were $35 million and $9 million, respectively, which is
being recognized as a charge to income over the remaining vesting period.
restricted stock, restricted
stock units, deferred stock and performance share award programs
awards of restricted stock and deferred stock are made
to eligible officers and key employees pursuant to the 2004 incentive plan.
such awards include restricted stock grants under the capital accumulation
program (cap) and equity awards program established pursuant to the 2004
incentive plan. awards issued under cap are in the form of restricted stock and
the number of shares included in the restricted stock award is calculated at a
10% discount from the market price on the date of the award and generally vest
in full after a two-year period from the date of grant. cap has been
discontinued following the issuance of cap awards in february2006. other
restricted stock awards issued under the equity awards program generally vest
in full after a three-year period from the date of grant. except under limited
circumstances, during this period the stock cannot be sold or transferred by
the participant, who is required to render service to the company during the
restricted period. awards granted to non-u.s. participants are in the form of
deferred stock awards. these deferred stock awards are granted at market price,
generally vest after three years from the date of grant and are subject to the
same conditions as the restricted stock awards except that the shares are not
issued until the vesting criteria are satisfied.
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
11. share-based incentive
compensation (continued)
commencing with equity grants on or after
january1, 2007, the company began to generally grant restricted stock
units instead of restricted stock. a restricted stock unit represents the right
to receive a share of common stock. these restricted stock unit awards will be
granted at market price, will generally vest after three years from the date of
grant and will be subject to the same conditions as the restricted stock awards
except that the restricted stock units will not have voting rights and the
common stock will not be issued until the vesting criteria are satisfied.
on october25, 2005, the companys board of
directors approved a performance share awards program pursuant to the 2004
incentive plan. under the program, which became effective beginning in 2006,
the company may issue performance share awards to certain employees of the
company who hold positions of vice president (or its equivalent) or above. the
performance awards represent target shares that provide the recipient the right
to earn shares of the companys common stock based upon the companys
attainment of certain performance goals. the performance goals for performance
awards granted in 2006 are based on the companys adjusted return on equity
over a three-year performance period. vesting of any performance shares is
contingent upon the company attaining the relevant performance period minimum
threshold return on equity. if the performance period return on equity is below
the minimum threshold, none of the shares will vest; if performance meets or
exceeds the minimum performance threshold, between 50%-160% of the
performance shares will vest, depending on the actual return on equity
attained.
the fair value of restricted stock, deferred stock and
performance shares is measured at the market price of the company stock at date
of grant.
the total fair value of shares that vested during the
year ended december31, 2006 was $59 million.
a
summary of restricted stock, deferred stock awards and performance share
activity under the companys 2004 incentive plan and the legacy tpc and legacy
spc share-based incentive compensation plans as of and for the year ended december31,
2006 is as follows:
restrictedanddeferredshares
performanceshares
otherequityinstruments
number
weighted
average
grant
datefair
value
number
weighted
average
grant
datefair
value
outstanding,
beginning of year
3,697,335
$
35.53
$
granted
2,165,499
43.40
379,484
44.80
vested(1)
(1,294,249
)
35.88
forfeited
(193,952
)
39.23
(15,336
)
44.80
outstanding, end of year
4,374,633
$
39.16
364,148
$
44.80
(1) represents
awards for which the requisite service has been rendered including those that
are retirement eligible. excludes performance shares which remain subject to
attainment of a performance condition.
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
11.
share-based incentive compensation (continued)
share-based
compensation recognition
the compensation cost for awards subject to a service
condition is based upon the number of equity instruments for which the
requisite service period is expected to be rendered. awards granted to
retiree-eligible or to employees that become retiree-eligible before an awards
vesting date are considered to have met the requisite service condition. the
compensation cost for awards subject to a performance condition is based upon
the probable outcome that the performance condition will be achieved. the
compensation cost reflects an estimated annual forfeiture rate of 5% over the
requisite service period of the awards. that estimate is revised if subsequent
information indicates that the actual number of instruments expected to vest is
likely to differ from previous estimates. compensation cost for awards are recognized on
a straight-line basis over the requisite service period. for awards that have a
graded vesting schedule, the compensation cost is recognized on a straight-line
basis over the requisite service period for each separate vesting portion of
the award as if the award was, in substance, multiple awards. the total
compensation cost for all share-based incentive compensation awards recognized
in earnings for the year ended december31, 2006 was $147 million.
included in that amount was approximately $12million of compensation
costs related to awards granted, prior to the adoption of fas 123r, to
retiree-eligible or to employees that became retiree-eligible before the awards
vesting date. the related tax benefits recognized in earnings were $51 million
for the year ended december31, 2006.
as of december31, 2006, there was $125 million
of total unrecognized compensation cost related to all nonvested share-based incentive
compensation awards. this includes stock options, restricted stock, deferred
stock and performance shares granted under the companys 2004 incentive plan
and legacy tpc and legacy spc share-based incentive compensation plans. the
unrecognized compensation cost is expected to be recognized over a
weighted-average period of 1.7 years.
upon adoption of fas 123r, the company had $9 million
of unrecognized pretax compensation cost related to the portion of awards
granted prior to the companys adoption of fas 123 (january1, 2003) which
remained unvested and outstanding. these compensation costs are being
recognized ratably over the remaining requisite service period of approximately
fifteen months. at december31, 2006, the company had approximately $1 million
of remaining unrecognized pretax compensation cost related to these awards.
the requirement to report unearned compensation as
contra-equity in the consolidated balance sheet was eliminated by fas 123r. accordingly,
the companys unearned compensation balances were reclassified to common stock
for all years presented.
cash received from the exercise of employee stock
options under share-based compensation plans totaled $216 million in 2006. the
tax benefit realized for tax deductions from employee stock option exercises
totaled $28 million for 2006.
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
11.
share-based incentive compensation (continued)
the following table
illustrates the effect on net income and earnings per share for each period
indicated as if the company had applied the fair value recognition provisions
of fas 123 to all outstanding and unvested stock-based employee awards.
(fortheyearendeddecember31,inmillions,exceptpersharedata)
net
income as reported
$
1,622
$
add: stock-based
employee compensation expense included in reported net income, net of related
tax effects (1)
deduct:
stock-based employee compensation expense determined under fair value based
method, net of related tax effects (2)
(76
)
(75
)
net
income pro forma
$
1,610
$
earnings per share
basicas reported
$
2.39
$
1.56
basicpro forma
2.37
1.52
dilutedas reported
2.33
1.53
dilutedpro forma
2.31
1.49
(1) represents compensation
expense on all restricted stock and stock option awards granted after january1,
2003.
(2) includes
the compensation expense added back in (1).
12. pension plans,
retirement benefits and savings plans
the company sponsors a qualified non-contributory
defined benefit pension plan, which covers substantially all employees and
provides benefits under a cash balance formula, except that employees
satisfying certain age and service requirements remain covered by a prior final
pay formula. prior to december31, 2004, both tpc and spc sponsored
qualified noncontributory defined benefit pension plans. these plans were
merged to form one company plan on december31, 2004. in addition, the
company and tpc sponsor nonqualified defined benefit pension plans which cover
certain highly-compensated employees and also sponsor postretirement health and
life insurance benefit plans for employees satisfying certain age and service
requirements and for certain retirees.
as discussed in note 1, the company adopted the
provisions of fas 158, employers accounting for
defined benefit pension and other postretirement plans, and amendment of fasb
statements no.87, 88, 106 and 132(r).
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
12.
pension plans, retirement benefits and savings plans (continued)
the incremental effects of
applying fas 158 on individual line items of the companys balance sheet at december31,
2006 were as follows:
(inmillions)
before
applicationof
fas158
adjustments
after
applicationof
fas158
deferred tax
asset
$
1,493
$
$
1,536
other assets
2,742
(155
)
2,587
total assets
113,873
(112
)
113,761
other liabilities
6,674
(32
)
6,642
total liabilities
88,658
(32
)
88,626
accumulated other
changes in equity from nonowner sources
(80
)
total shareholders
equity
25,215
(80
)
25,135
obligations and
funded status
the following tables summarize the funded status,
obligations and amounts recognized in the consolidated balance sheet for the
companys benefit plans. the company uses a december31 measurement date
for its pension and postretirement benefit plans.
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
12. pension
plans, retirement benefits and savings plans (continued)
qualified
domesticplan
non-qualified
and
foreignplans
total
(fortheyearendeddecember31,inmillions)
change
in projected benefit obligation
benefit
obligation at beginning of year
$
1,750
$
1,605
$
$
$
1,942
$
1,771
benefits earned
interest cost on
benefit obligation
actuarial loss
(gain)
(32
)
(2
)
(34
)
benefits paid
(126
)
(106
)
(21
)
(12
)
(147
)
(118
)
foreign currency
exchange rate change
(8
)
(8
)
benefits obligation at end of year
$
1,752
$
1,750
$
$
$
1,944
$
1,942
change
in plan assets
fair value of
plan assets at beginning of year
$
1,786
$
1,730
$
$
$
1,881
$
1,818
actual return on
plan assets
company
contributions
benefits paid
(126
)
(106
)
(21
)
(12
)
(147
)
(118
)
foreign currency
exchange rate change
(9
)
(9
)
fair value of
plan assets at end of year
$
1,884
$
1,786
$
$
$
1,987
$
1,881
reconciliation
of prepaid (accrued) benefit cost and total amount recognized
funded status of
plan at end of year
$
$
$
(89
)
$
(97
)
$
$
(61
)
unrecognized:
prior service benefit
n/a
(24
)
n/a
(2
)
n/a
(26
)
net actuarial loss
n/a
n/a
n/a
net amount recognized
$
n/a
$
$
n/a
$
(56
)
$
n/a
$
amounts
recognized in the statement of financial position consist of:
prepaid benefit
cost
$
n/a
$
$
n/a
$
$
n/a
$
accrued benefit
liability
n/a
n/a
(85
)
n/a
(85
)
accumulated other
changes in equity from nonowner sourcesminimum pension liability
n/a
n/a
n/a
accrued
over-funded benefit plan assets
n/a
n/a
n/a
accrued
under-funded benefit plan liabilities
n/a
(92
)
n/a
(92
)
n/a
total
$
$
$
(89
)
$
(56
)
$
$
amounts recognized in the
accumulated other changes in equity from nonowner sources:
prior service
benefit
$
(19
)
$
n/a
$
(1
)
$
n/a
$
(20
)
$
n/a
net actuarial
loss (gain)
n/a
n/a
n/a
total
$
$
n/a
$
$
n/a
$
$
n/a
n/anot applicable.
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
12.
pension plans, retirement benefits and savings plans (continued)
postretirement
benefitplans
(atandfortheyearendeddecember31,inmillions)
change
in projected benefit obligation
benefit
obligation at beginning of year
$
$
benefits earned
interest cost on
benefit obligation
actuarial gain
(16
)
(35
)
benefits paid
(19
)
(19
)
foreign currency
exchange rate change
benefit obligation at end of year
$
$
change
in plan assets
fair value of
plan assets at beginning of year
$
$
actual return on
plan assets
company
contributions
benefits paid
(19
)
(19
)
fair value of plan assets at end of year
$
$
reconciliation
of prepaid (accrued) benefit cost and total amount recognized
funded status of
plan at end of year
$
(238
)
$
(257
)
unrecognized:
prior service benefit
n/a
net actuarial loss (gain)
n/a
(28
)
net amount recognized
$
n/a
$
(285
)
amounts
recognized in the statement of financial position consist of:
prepaid benefit
cost
$
n/a
$
accrued benefit
liability
n/a
(285
)
accumulated other
changes in equity from nonowner sourcesminimum pension liability
n/a
accrued
under-funded benefit plan liability
(238
)
n/a
total
$
(238
)
$
(285
)
amounts recognized in the
accumulated other changes in equity from nonowner sources:
prior service
benefit
$
$
n/a
net actuarial
gain
(44
)
n/a
total
$
(44
)
$
n/a
n/anot applicable.
the total accumulated benefit obligation for the
companys defined benefit pension plans was $1.90 billion and $1.88 billion at december31,
2006 and 2005, respectively. the qualified domestic plan accounted for $1.71
billion and $1.69 billion of the total accumulated benefit obligation at december31,
2006 and 2005, respectively, whereas the non-qualified and foreign plans
accounted for $0.19 billion of the total accumulated benefit obligation at december31,
2006 and 2005.
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
12.
pension plans, retirement benefits and savings plans (continued)
for pension plans with an accumulated benefit
obligation in excess of plan assets, the aggregate projected benefit obligation
and the aggregate accumulated benefit obligation were $123 million and $123
million, respectively, at december31, 2006 and $186 million and $185
million at december31, 2005, respectively. the fair value of plan assets
for the above plans was $31 million and $88 million at december31, 2006
and 2005, respectively.
the company has discretion regarding whether to
provide additional funding and when to provide such funding to its qualified
pension plan. the company has not determined whether or not additional funding
will be made during the next fiscal year. there is no required contribution to
the qualified pension plan during the next fiscal year.
the
following table summarizes the components of net periodic benefit cost and
other amounts recognized in accumulated other changes in equity from nonowner
sources related to the benefit plans for the years ended december31,
2006, 2005 and 2004.
pensionplans
postretirement
benefitplans
(inmillions)
net
periodic benefit cost:
service cost
$
$
$
$
$
$
interest cost on
benefit obligation
expected return
on plan assets
(148
)
(139
)
(117
)
(1
)
(2
)
(1
)
amortization of unrecognized:
prior service benefit
(6
)
(6
)
(6
)
net actuarial loss
net benefit expense
$
$
$
$
$
$
other amounts recognized in
accumulated other changes in equity from nonowner sources:
prior service
benefit
$
(20
)
$
n/a
$
n/a
$
$
n/a
$
n/a
net actuarial
loss (gain)
n/a
n/a
(44
)
n/a
n/a
amortization of
prior service cost
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
total recognized in other changes in equity from nonowner
sources
n/a
n/a
(44
)
n/a
n/a
total recognized
in net benefit expense and other changes in equity from nonowner sources
$
$
n/a
$
n/a
$
(27
)
$
n/a
$
n/a
n/anot applicable.
the estimated net loss
(gain) and prior service benefit for the defined benefit pension plans that
will be amortized from other changes in equity from nonowner sources into net
periodic benefit cost over the next fiscal year are $4 million and $(6)million,
respectively. the estimated net loss (gain) and prior service cost for the
postretirement benefit plans that will be amortized from other changes in
equity from nonowner sources into net periodic benefit cost over the next
fiscal year are $(3)million and $0 million, respectively.
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
12.
pension plans, retirement benefits and savings plans (continued)
assumptions and health care cost trend rate
sensitivity
(atandfortheyearendeddecember31,)
assumptions used to determine
benefit obligations
discount rate
6.00
%
5.75
%
future
compensation increase rate
4.00
%
4.00
%
assumptions used to determine
net periodic benefit cost
discount rate
5.75
%
6.00
%
expected
long-term rate of return on assets
8.00
%
8.00
%
assumed
health care cost trend rates
following year:
medical (before age 65)
8.00
%
9.00
%
medical (age 65 and older)
10.00
%
11.00
%
rate to which the cost trend rate is assumed to
decline (ultimate trend rate)
5.00
%
5.00
%
year that the
rate reaches the ultimate trend rate:
medical (before age 65)
medical (age 65
and older)
the discount rate assumption used to determine the
benefit obligation is based on the moodys aa corporate bond index adjusted by
25 basis points to reflect the long duration nature of the pension obligation
and adjusted to the nearest quarter rate. the discount rate is then back-tested
by comparison to a yield curve that reflects the hypothetical portfolio of high
quality bonds (rated aa or higher by a recognized rating agency) for which the
timing and amount of cash outflows approximates the estimated payouts of the
plan.
in choosing the expected long-term rate of return, the
companys pension plan investment committee considered the historical returns
of equity and fixed income markets in conjunction with todays economic and
financial market conditions.
as an indicator of
sensitivity, increasing the assumed health care cost trend rate by 1% would
have increased the accumulated postretirement benefit obligation by $29 million
at december31, 2006, and the aggregate of the service and interest cost
components of net postretirement benefit expense by $2 million for the year
ended december31, 2006. decreasing the assumed health care cost trend
rate by 1% would have decreased the accumulated postretirement benefit
obligation at december31, 2006 by $28 million and the aggregate of the
service and interest cost components of net postretirement benefit expense by
$2 million for the year ended december31, 2006.
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
12.
pension plans, retirement benefits and savings plans (continued)
plan assets
the percentage of the fair
value of pension plan assets held by asset category is as follows:
(atdecember31,)
equity securities
%
%
debt securities
%
%
cash
%
%
other
%
%
total
%
%
pension plan assets are invested for the exclusive
benefit of the plan participants and beneficiaries and are intended, over time,
to satisfy the benefit obligations under the plan. risk tolerance is
established through consideration of plan liabilities, plan funded status, and
corporate financial condition. the asset mix guidelines have been established
and are reviewed quarterly. these guidelines are intended to serve as tools to
facilitate the investment of plan assets to maximize long-term total return and
the ongoing oversight of the plans investment performance. the investment
portfolio contains a diversified mix of equity and fixed-income investments.
equity investments are diversified across u.s. and non-u.s. stocks. other
assets such as partnerships and real estate are used to enhance long-term
returns while improving portfolio diversification. investment risk is measured
and monitored on an ongoing basis through daily and monthly investment
portfolio review, annual liability measurements, and periodic asset/liability
studies.
maximum and minimum targets for asset allocations at december31,
2006 by asset category were as follows:
assetcategory
plan
assets
equity securities
25  75
%
fixed maturity
securities
15  75
%
cash
0  20
%
other
0  10
%
equity securities include 797,600 shares of the
companys common stock with a market value of $43million at
december31, 2006.
the
companys other post-retirement benefit plan weighted-average asset allocations
at december31, 2006 and 2005 by asset category were as follows:
assetcategory
fixed maturity
securities
%
%
cash
%
%
equity securities
%
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
12. pension plans, retirement benefits and savings
plans (continued)
estimated future
benefit payments
benefits
expected to be paid, which reflect estimated future employee service, are
estimated to be:
expectedpaymentsbyperiod(inmillions)
pension
plans
postretirement
benefitplans
prescription
drug
subsidy
$
$
$
2012 through 2016
savings plan
the company, in september2005,
merged the travelers 401(k)savings plan, the st. paul companies,inc.
savings plus plan (spp), and the st. paul companies,inc. stock ownership
plan (sop) into one new plan, the st. paul travelers 401(k)savings plan
(the savings plan). substantially all company employees are eligible to
participate in the savings plan. in 2006 and 2005, the company matched employee
contributions up to 5% of eligible pay, with a maximum annual match of $5,000
which becomes 100% vested after three years of service. the company match
contributed to accounts through 2006 was primarily in the form of the companys
common stock. beginning with the 2006 match that was contributed in 2007, the
company matching contribution is made in cash and invested according to the
employees current investment elections. the company matching contribution can
be reinvested at any time into any other investment option. the expense related
to this plan was $69 million and $63 million for the years ended december31,
2006 and 2005, respectively.
legacy tpc 401(k)savings
plan
prior to the september2005
plan merger, the company had a 401(k)savings plan under which
substantially all legacy tpc employees and company employees hired after april1,
2004, were eligible to participate. in 2004, the company matched employee
contributions up to 5% of eligible pay but not more than $2,500 annually. prior
to 2004, the company matched employee contributions up to 3% of eligible pay
but not more than $1,500 annually. the expense related to this plan was $34
million for the year ended december31, 2004.
legacy spc 401(k)savings
plus and stock ownership plans
prior to the september2005
plan merger and in connection with the merger with spc, the company assumed the
st. paul companies,inc. savings plus plan (spp), a 401(k)savings
plan and the st. paul companies,inc. stock ownership plan (sop).
substantially all employees who were hired by legacy spc before april1,
2004 were eligible to participate in these plans. in 2004 under the spp, the
company matched 100% of employees contributions up to a maximum of 6% of their
salary. the match was in the form of preferred shares, to the extent available
in the sop, or in the companys common shares. also allocated to participants
were preferred shares equal to the value of dividends on previously allocated
shares.
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
12.
pension plans, retirement benefits and savings plans (continued)
to finance the preferred stock purchase for future
allocation to qualified employees, the sop borrowed $150 million at 9.4% from a
primary u.s. underwriting subsidiary. as the principal and interest of the
trusts loan was paid, a pro rata amount of preferred stock was released for
allocation to participating employees. each share of preferred stock pays a
dividend of $11.72 annually and is currently convertible into eight shares of
the companys common stock. preferred stock dividends on all shares held by the
trust were used to pay a portion of the sop obligation. in addition to
dividends paid to the trust, additional cash contributions were made to the sop
as necessary in order to meet the sops debt obligation. the sops debt
obligation was paid off in january2005 with a final payment of $5
million; consequently, all preferred stock dividends are now paid to preferred
stockholders. the sop allocated the final 71,346 preferred shares in 2004. the
sop has no preferred shares available for future allocations.
all common shares and the common stock equivalent of
all preferred shares held by the sop are considered outstanding for diluted eps
computations and dividends paid on all shares are charged to retained earnings.
the company follows the
provisions of statement of position 76-3, accounting practices for
certain employee stock ownership plans, and related interpretations in
accounting for this plan. the company recorded an expense of $5 million in
2004.
13. leases
rent expense was $238 million, $219 million and $207
million in 2006, 2005 and 2004, respectively.
future minimum annual
rental payments under noncancellable operating leases are $185 million, $165
million, $133 million, $87 million, $66 million and $272 million for 2007,
2008, 2009, 2010, 2011 and 2012 and thereafter, respectively. future sublease
rental income aggregating approximately $55 million will partially offset these
commitments.
14. derivative financial
instruments and fair value of financial instruments
derivative
financial instruments
derivative
instruments designated as hedging instruments
the company has foreign
currency hedges of net investments in foreign operations in which derivatives
(foreign currency forward contracts) hedge the foreign currency exposure. the
effective portion of the change in fair value of the derivative hedging the net
investment, including any forward premium or discount, is reflected in the
accumulated other changes in equity from nonowner sources as part of the
foreign currency translation adjustment. for the years ended december31,
2006 and 2005, the amount included in changes in equity from nonowner sources
was a loss of less than $1 million in 2006 and a loss of $2 million in 2005. during
2006, the company incurred net realized investment losses of approximately
$8million resulting from the dissolution of a designated hedging
relationship. during 2006 and 2005, the company incurred net realized
investment losses of less than $1 million from hedge ineffectiveness.
derivative
instruments not designated as hedging instruments
derivatives that are not designated or do not qualify
as hedges are carried at fair value with changes in value reflected in net
realized investment gains (losses). the company has certain u.s. treasury
futures
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
14.
derivative financial instruments and fair value of financial instruments
(continued)
contracts and foreign
currency forward contracts, which are not designated as hedges at december31,
2006 and 2005.
the company engaged in u.s. treasury note futures
transactions to modify the duration of specific assets within the investment
portfolio. the company enters into 90-day futures contracts on 2-year,
5-year, 10-year and 30-year u.s. treasury notes which require
a daily mark-to-market settlement with the broker. the notional value of the
open u.s. treasury futures contracts was $350 million and $1.20 billion at december31,
2006 and 2005, respectively. these derivative instruments are not designated
and do not qualify as hedges under fas 133 and as such the daily mark-to-market
changes in fair value are reflected in net realized investment gains (losses).
net realized investment gains in 2006 and 2005 included net gains of $30
million and $13 million, respectively, related to u.s. treasury futures
contracts which are settled daily.
the company owns six million stock purchase warrants
of platinum underwriters holdings, ltd., a publicly-held company. these
warrants are not designated and do not qualify as hedges under fas 133 and as
such the mark-to-market changes in fair value are reflected in net realized
investment gains (losses). in 2006 and 2005, the company recorded a net
realized investment loss of $22 million and a net realized investment gain of
$7 million, respectively, related to the companys holdings of stock purchase
warrants of platinum underwriters holdings, ltd.
the company purchases
investments that have embedded derivatives, primarily convertible debt
securities. these embedded derivatives are carried at fair value with changes
in value reflected in net realized investment gains (losses). derivatives
embedded in convertible debt securities are reported on a combined basis with
their host instrument and are classified as fixed maturity securities.
fair value of
financial instruments
the company uses various financial instruments in the
normal course of its business. the companys insurance contracts are excluded
by fas 107, disclosures about fair value of
financial instruments, and, therefore, are not included in the
amounts discussed.
at december31, 2006 and 2005, investments in
fixed maturities had a fair value, which equaled carrying value, of $62.67
billion and $58.98 billion, respectively. the fair value of investments in
fixed maturities for which a quoted market price or dealer quote are not available
was $547 million and $456million at december31, 2006 and 2005,
respectively. see note 1.
the carrying values of cash, short-term securities,
mortgage loans and investment income accrued approximated their fair values.
see notes 1 and 3.
the carrying values of $876 million and $1.11 billion
of financial instruments classified as other assets approximated their fair
values at december31, 2006 and 2005, respectively. the carrying values of
$5.15billion and $5.33 billion of financial instruments classified as
other liabilities at december31, 2006 and 2005, respectively, also
approximated their fair values. fair value is determined using various methods
including discounted cash flows, as appropriate for the various financial
instruments.
the carrying value and fair value of the companys
debt at december31, 2006 was $5.76 billion and $5.98 billion,
respectively. the respective totals at december31, 2005 were $5.85
billion and $5.82 billion.
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
14.
derivative financial instruments and fair value of financial instruments
(continued)
the fair value of
commercial paper included in debt outstanding at december31, 2006 and
2005 approximated its book value because of its short-term nature. for other
debt, the fair value estimate was based upon the bid price at december31,
2006 and 2005.
15. contingencies,
commitments and guarantees
contingencies
the following section
describes the major pending legal proceedings, other than ordinary routine
litigation incidental to the business, to which the company or any of its
subsidiaries is a party or to which any of the companys property is subject.
asbestos- and
environmental-related proceedings
in the ordinary course of its insurance business, the
company receives claims for insurance arising under policies issued by the
company asserting alleged injuries and damages from asbestos, hazardous waste
and other toxic substances that are the subject of related coverage litigation,
including, among others, the litigation described below. the company continues
to be subject to aggressive asbestos-related litigation. the conditions
surrounding the final resolution of these claims and the related litigation
continue to change.
travelers property casualty corp. (tpc) is involved in
three significant proceedings (including a bankruptcy proceeding) relating to
acands,inc. (acands), formerly a national distributor and installer of
products containing asbestos. the proceedings involve disputes as to whether
and to what extent any of acands potential liabilities for current or future
bodily injury asbestos claims are covered by insurance policies issued by tpc. the
status of the various proceedings is described below.
acands filed for bankruptcy in september2002 (in re: acands,inc., pending in the
u.s. bankruptcy court for the district of delaware). in its proposed plan of
reorganization, acands sought to establish a trust to pay asbestos bodily
injury claims against it and sought to assign to the trust its rights under the
insurance policies issued by tpc. the proposed plan and disclosure statement
filed by acands claimed that acands had settled the vast majority of asbestos-related
bodily injury claims currently pending against it for approximately $2.80
billion. acands asserts that, based on a prior agreement between tpc and acands
and acands interpretation of the july31, 2003 arbitration panel ruling
described below, tpc is liable for 45% of the $2.80 billion. on january26,
2004, the bankruptcy court issued a decision rejecting confirmation of acands
proposed plan of reorganization. the bankruptcy court found, consistent with
tpcs objections to acands proposed plan, that the proposed plan was not
fundamentally fair, was not proposed in good faith and did not comply with section524(g)of
the bankruptcy code. acands has filed a notice of appeal of the bankruptcy
courts decision and has filed objections to the bankruptcy courts findings of
fact and conclusions of law in the united states district court. tpc has moved
to dismiss the appeal and objections and has also filed an opposition to acands
objections.
an arbitration was commenced in january2001 to
determine whether and to what extent acands financial obligations for bodily
injury asbestos claims are subject to insurance policy aggregate limits. on july31,
2003, the arbitration panel ruled in favor of tpc that asbestos bodily injury
claims against acands are subject to the aggregate limits of the policies
issued to acands, which have been exhausted. in
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
15.
contingencies, commitments and guarantees (continued)
october2003, acands
commenced a lawsuit seeking to vacate the arbitration award as beyond the panels
scope of authority (acands,inc. v.
travelers casualty and surety co., u.s.d.ct. e.d. pa.). on september16,
2004, the district court entered an order denying acands motion to vacate the
arbitration award. on january19, 2006, the united states court of appeals
for the third circuit reversed the district courts decision and declared the
arbitration award void on procedural grounds. on may22, 2006, the united
states supreme court denied tpcs petition for a writ of certiorari seeking
review of the third circuits decision. as a result, the matter has been
remanded to district court and tpc has asked the district court to remand the
arbitration to the panel that initially ruled in favor of tpc for further
proceedings consistent with the third circuits decision. acands has opposed
that request.
in the other proceeding, a related case pending before
the same court and commenced in september2000 (acands v. travelers casualty and surety co., u.s.d.ct., e.d.
pa.), acands sought a declaration of the extent to which the asbestos bodily
injury claims against acands are subject to occurrence limits under insurance
policies issued by tpc. tpc filed a motion to dismiss this action based upon
the july31, 2003 arbitration decision described above. the district court
found the dispute was moot as a result of the arbitration panels decision and
dismissed the case. as a result of the january19, 2006 ruling by the
third circuit and the supreme courts denial of certiorari, described in the
paragraph above, this case has been reinstated.
the company continues to believe it has meritorious
positions in these acands-related proceedings and intends to litigate
vigorously.
in october2001 and april2002, two
purported class action suits (wise v.
travelers and meninger v. travelers)
were filed against tpc and other insurers (not including spc) in state court in
west virginia. these cases were subsequently consolidated into a single
proceeding in the circuit court of kanawha county, west virginia. plaintiffs
allege that the insurer defendants engaged in unfair trade practices by
inappropriately handling and settling asbestos claims. the plaintiffs seek to
reopen large numbers of settled asbestos claims and to impose liability for
damages, including punitive damages, directly on insurers. lawsuits similar to wise were filed in massachusetts and
hawaii (these suits are collectively referred to as the statutory and hawaii
actions). also, in november2001, plaintiffs in consolidated asbestos
actions pending before a mass tort panel of judges in west virginia state court
moved to amend their complaint to name tpc as a defendant, alleging that tpc
and other insurers breached alleged duties to certain users of asbestos
products. in march2002, the court granted the motion to amend. plaintiffs
seek damages, including punitive damages. lawsuits seeking similar relief and
raising allegations similar to those presented in the west virginia amended
complaint are also pending in texas state court against tpc and spc, and in
louisiana state court against tpc (the claims asserted in these suits, together
with the west virginia suit, are collectively referred to as the common law
claims). lawsuits seeking similar relief in ohio have been dismissed.
all of the actions against tpc described in the preceding
paragraph, other than the hawaii actions, had been subject to a temporary
restraining order entered by the federal bankruptcy court in new york that had
previously presided over and approved the reorganization in bankruptcy of tpcs
former policyholder johns-manville corporation and affiliated entities. in august2002,
the bankruptcy court held a hearing on tpcs motion for a preliminary
injunction prohibiting further prosecution of the lawsuits pursuant to the
reorganization plan and related orders. at the conclusion of this hearing, the
court ordered the parties to mediation, appointed a mediator and continued the
temporary restraining order. during
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
15.
contingencies, commitments and guarantees (continued)
2003, the same bankruptcy
court extended the existing injunction to apply to an additional set of cases
filed in various state courts in texas and ohio as well as to the attorneys who
are prosecuting these cases. the order also enjoined these attorneys and their
respective law firms from commencing any further lawsuits against tpc based
upon these allegations without the prior approval of the court. notwithstanding
the injunction, additional common law claims were filed and served on tpc.
on november19, 2003, the parties advised the
bankruptcy court that a settlement of the statutory and hawaii actions had been
reached. this settlement includes a lump-sum payment of up to $412 million by
tpc, subject to a number of significant contingencies. after continued meetings
with the mediator, the parties advised the bankruptcy court on may25,
2004 that a settlement resolving substantially all pending and similar future
common law claims against tpc had also been reached. this settlement requires a
payment of up to $90 million by tpc, subject to a number of significant
contingencies. each of these settlements is contingent upon, among other
things, an order of the bankruptcy court clarifying that all of these claims,
and similar future asbestos-related claims against tpc, are barred by prior
orders entered by the bankruptcy court in connection with the original
johns-manville bankruptcy proceedings.
on august17, 2004, the bankruptcy court entered
an order approving the settlements and clarifying its prior orders that all of
the pending statutory and hawaii actions and substantially all common law
claims pending against tpc are barred. the order also applies to similar direct
action claims that may be filed in the future.
four appeals were taken from the august17, 2004
ruling. on march29, 2006, the u.s. district court for the southern
district of new york substantially affirmed the bankruptcy courts orders while
vacating that portion of the bankruptcy courts orders that required all future
direct actions against tpc to first be approved by the bankruptcy court before
proceeding in state or federal court. judgment was entered on march31,
2006.
five appeals from the march29, 2006 ruling were
filed in the u.s. court of appeals for the second circuit and tpc filed a
cross-appeal. two appellants voluntarily dismissed their appeals and a motion
to dismiss the cross-appeal was filed. additionally, tpc appealed from a
procedural order of the district court relating to the timeliness of the
cross-appeal. on january17, 2007, the second circuit dismissed tpcs cross-appeal
and denied tpcs appeal from the procedural order. the three remaining
principal appeals have been consolidated for disposition and remain pending. it
is not possible to predict how the appellate court will ruleon the
pending appeals. the company has no obligation to pay any of the settlement
amounts unless and until the orders and relief become final and are not subject
to any further appellate review.
spc, which is not covered by the bankruptcy court
rulings or the settlements described above, has numerous defenses in all of the
direct action cases asserting common law claims that are pending against it. spcs
defenses include the fact that these novel theories have no basis in law; that
they are directly at odds with the well-established law pertaining to the
insured/insurer relationship; that there is no generalized duty to warn as
alleged by the plaintiffs; and that the applicable statute of limitations as to
many of these claims has long since expired. many of these defenses have been
raised in initial motions to dismiss filed by spc and other insurers. there
have been favorable rulings during 2003 and 2004 in texas and during 2004 and
2005 in ohio on some of these motions filed by spc and other insurers that
dealt with statute of limitations and the validity of the alleged causes of
actions. on may26, 2005, the court of appeals of ohio, eighth district,
affirmed the earliest of these favorable rulings. in texas, only one court,
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
15.
contingencies, commitments and guarantees (continued)
in juneof 2005, has
denied the insurers initial challenges to the pleadings. that ruling was
contrary to the rulings by other courts in similar cases, and spc and the other
insurer defendants have filed a mandamus petition with the texas court of
appeals.
the company is defending its asbestos- and
environmental-related litigation vigorously and believes that it has
meritorious defenses; however, the outcome of these disputes is uncertain. in
this regard, the company employs dedicated specialists and aggressive resolution
strategies to manage asbestos and environmental loss exposure, including
settling litigation under appropriate circumstances. for a discussion of other
information regarding the companys asbestos and environmental exposure, see item7managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operationsasbestos
claims and litigation, environmental claims and litigation and uncertainty
regarding adequacy of asbestos and environmental reserves.
currently, it is not
possible to predict legal outcomes and their impact on the future development
of claims and litigation relating to asbestos and environmental claims. any
such development will be affected by future court decisions and
interpretations, as well as changes in applicable legislation. because of these
uncertainties, additional liabilities may arise for amounts in excess of the
current related reserves. in addition, the companys estimate of ultimate
claims and claim adjustment expenses may change. these additional liabilities
or increases in estimates, or a range of either, cannot now be reasonably
estimated and could result in income statement charges that could be material
to the companys results of operations in future periods.
shareholder
litigation and related proceedings
three actions against the company and certain of its
current and former officers and directors are pending in the united states
district court for the district of minnesota. two of these actions, which were
originally captioned kahn v. the st. paul
travelers companies,inc., et al. (nov.2, 2004) and michael a. bernstein profit sharing plan v. the st.
paul travelers companies,inc., et al. (nov.10, 2004),
are putative class actions brought by certain shareholders of the company
against the company and certain of its current and former officers and
directors. these actions have been consolidated as in re st. paul travelers securities litigation ii, and a
lead plaintiff and lead counsel have been appointed. on july11, 2005, the
lead plaintiff filed an amended consolidated complaint. the amended
consolidated complaint alleges violations of federal securities laws in
connection with the companys alleged failure to make disclosure relating to
the practice of paying brokers commissions on a contingent basis, the companys
alleged involvement in a conspiracy to rig bids and the companys allegedly
improper use of finite reinsurance products. on september26, 2005, the
company and the other defendants in in re st. paul travelers securities litigation
ii moved to dismiss the amended consolidated complaint for failure
to state a claim. oral argument on the companys motion to dismiss was
presented on june15, 2006. by order dated september25, 2006, the
court denied the companys motion to dismiss. discovery has commenced. on november3,
2006, the company and the other defendants in in re st.
paul travelers securities litigation ii moved for partial judgment
on the pleadings seeking dismissal of the allegations relating to the allegedly
improper use of finite reinsurance products. that motion remains pending. in the
third action, an alleged beneficiary of the companys 401(k)savings plan
commenced a putative class action against the company and certain of its
current and former officers and directors captioned spiziri v. the st. paul travelers companies,inc., et al.
(dec.28, 2004). the complaint alleges violations of the employee
retirement income security act based on the theory that defendants were
allegedly aware of issues concerning the
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
15.
contingencies, commitments and guarantees (continued)
value of spcs loss
reserves yet failed to protect plan participants from continued investment in
company stock. on june1,
2005, the company and the other defendants in
spiziri moved to dismiss the complaint. on january4, 2006, the
parties in spiziri entered into a stipulation of
settlement. the settlement remains subject to court approval.
in addition, two derivative actions have been brought
in the united states district court for the district of minnesota against all
of the companys current directors and certain of the companys former
directors, naming the company as a nominal defendant: rowe v. fishman, et al. (oct.22, 2004) and clark v. fishman, et al. (nov.18,
2004). the derivative actions have been consolidated for pretrial proceedings
as rowe, et al. v. fishman, et al.
and a consolidated derivative complaint has been filed. the consolidated
derivative complaint asserts state law claims, including breach of fiduciary
duty, based on allegations similar to those alleged in in re st. paul travelers securities litigation ii and
spiziri described above. on march23, 2006, the court
dismissed the complaint without prejudice and, on march30, 2006, entered
judgment in favor of the company and the other defendants. on june5,
2006, plaintiffs in rowe moved to
alter or amend the judgment for leave to file an amended complaint. the company
and the other defendants opposed that motion. on november1, 2006, the
parties in rowe entered into a stipulation of settlement
whereby plaintiffs released the company and other defendants from liability in
exchange for an agreement by defendants to adopt certain corporate governance
measures for the benefit of the company. the settlement remains subject to
court approval.
the company believes that
the pending lawsuits have no merit and intends to defend vigorously; however,
the company is not able to provide any assurance that the financial impact of
one or more of these proceedings will not be material to the companys results
of operations in a future period. the company is obligated to indemnify its
officers and directors to the extent provided under minnesota law. as part of
that obligation, the company will advance officers and directors attorneys
fees and other expenses they incur in defending these lawsuits.
other proceedings
from time to time, the company is involved in
proceedings addressing disputes with its reinsurers regarding the collection of
amounts due under the companys reinsurance agreements. these proceedings may
be initiated by the company or the reinsurers and may involve the terms of the
reinsurance agreements, the coverage of particular claims, exclusions under the
agreements, as well as counterclaims for rescission of the agreements. one of
these disputes is the action described in the following paragraphs.
the companys gulf operation brought an action on may22,
2003, as amended on may12, 2004, in the supreme court of new york, county
of new york (gulf insurance company v.
transatlantic reinsurance company, et al.), against transatlantic
reinsurance company (transatlantic), xl reinsurance america,inc. (xl),
odyssey america reinsurance corporation (odyssey), employers reinsurance
company (employers) and gerling global reinsurance corporation of america
(gerling), to recover amounts due under reinsurance contracts issued to gulf
and related to gulfs february2003 settlement of a coverage dispute under
a vehicle residual value protection insurance policy. the reinsurers have
asserted counterclaims seeking rescission of the vehicle residual value
reinsurance contracts issued to gulf and unspecified damages for breach of
contract. separate actions filed by transatlantic and gerling have been
consolidated with the original gulf action for pre-trial purposes.
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
15. contingencies,
commitments and guarantees (continued)
on october1, 2003, gulf entered into a final
settlement agreement with employers, and all claims and counterclaims with
respect to employers have been dismissed. on may26, 2004, the court
denied gulfs motion to dismiss certain claims asserted by transatlantic and denied
a joint motion by transatlantic, xl and odyssey for summary judgment against
gulf. on december22, 2006, gulf and xl entered into a final settlement
agreement which resolves all claims between gulf and xl under the reinsurance
agreements at issue in the litigation. fact and expert discovery are complete
with respect to the remaining parties: transatlantic, odyssey and gerling.
gulf, transatlantic and gerling have filed motions for partial summary
judgment. the court has not yet set a trial date. gulf denies the reinsurers
allegations, believes that it has a strong legal basis to collect the amounts
due under the reinsurance contracts and intends to vigorously pursue the
actions.
based on the companys beliefs about its legal
positions in its various reinsurance recovery proceedings, the company does not
expect any of these matters will have a material adverse effect on its results
of operations in a future period.
the company is a defendant in three consolidated
lawsuits in the united states district court for the eastern district of
louisiana arising out of disputes with certain policyholders over whether
insurance coverage is available for flood losses arising from hurricane
katrina: chehardy, et al. v. state farm, et al.,
c.a. no.06-1672, 06-1673 and 06-1674, vanderbrook, et al. v. state farm fire& cas. co.,
et al. c.a. no.05-6323; and xavier university of
louisiana v. travelers property ca. co. of america, c.a. no.06-516.
chehardy and vanderbrook
are proposed class actions in which the company is one of several insurer
defendants. xavier is an individual suit involving a
property insurance policy brought by one of the companys insureds. the losses
involved in all of these suits allegedly were caused by the failure of the new
orleans levees. on november27, 2006, the court issued a ruling in the
three consolidated cases denying the motions of the company and certain other
insurers for a summary disposition of the cases. the courts ruling does not
determine that any additional amounts are owed under any of the companys
policies or otherwise reach the merits of the policyholders claims. the
company disagrees with the ruling and, along with certain other insurers named in
the consolidated lawsuits, filed a motion with the united states court of
appeals for the fifth circuit, seeking to have the court of appeals accept an
immediate appeal from the district courts ruling. on february1, 2007,
the fifth circuit accepted the appeal.
as part of ongoing,
industry-wide investigations, the company and its affiliates have received
subpoenas and written requests for information from government agencies and
authorities. the areas of pending inquiry addressed to the company include its
relationship with brokers and agents, and the companys involvement with non-traditional
insurance and reinsurance products. the
company or its affiliates have received subpoenas or requests for information,
in each case with respect to one or both of the areas described above, from: (i)state
of california office of the attorney general; (ii)state of california
department of insurance; (iii)licensing and market conduct compliance
division, financial services commission of ontario, canada; (iv)state of
connecticut insurance department; (v)state of connecticut office of the
attorney general; (vi)state of delaware department of insurance; (vii)state
of florida department of financial services; (viii)state of florida
office of insurance regulation; (ix)state of florida department of legal
affairs office of the attorney general; (x)state of georgia office of the
commissioner of insurance; (xi) state of hawaii office of the attorney general;
(xii)state of illinois office of the attorney general; (xiii) state of
illinois department of financial and professional regulation; (xiv) state of
iowa insurance division; (xv) state of maryland office of the attorney general;
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
15.
contingencies, commitments and guarantees (continued)
(xvi)state
of maryland insurance administration; (xvii) commonwealth of massachusetts
office of the attorney general; (xviii) state of minnesota department of
commerce; (xix) state of minnesota office of the attorney general; (xx) state
of new hampshire insurance department; (xxi) state of new york office of the
attorney general; (xxii) state of new york insurance department; (xxiii) state
of north carolina department of insurance; (xxiv) state of ohio office of the
attorney general; (xxv) state of ohio department of insurance; (xxvi) state of
oregon department of justice; (xxvii) commonwealth of pennsylvania office of
the attorney general; (xxviii) state of texas office of the attorney general;
(xxvix) state of texas department of insurance; (xxx) commonwealth of virginia
office of the attorney general; (xxxi) state of washington office of the
insurance commissioner; (xxxii) state of west virginia office of attorney
general; (xxxiii) the united states attorney for the southern district of new
york; (xxxiv) the united states internal revenue service, department of the
treasury; and (xxxv) the united states securities and exchange commission. the
company and its affiliates may receive additional subpoenas and requests for
information with respect to the areas described above from other agencies or
authorities.
the company is cooperating with these subpoenas and
requests for information. in addition, outside counsel, with the oversight of
the companys board of directors, has been conducting an internal review of
certain of the companys business practices. this review initially focused on
the companys relationship with brokers and was commenced after the
announcement of litigation brought by the new york attorney generals office
against a major broker.
the internal review was expanded to address the
various requests for information described above and to verify whether the
companys business practices in these areas have been appropriate. the companys
review has been extensive, involving the examination of e-mails and
underwriting files, as well as interviews of current and former employees. the
company also continues to receive and respond to additional requests for
information and will expand its review accordingly.
to date, the company has found only a few instances of
conduct that were inconsistent with the companys employee code of conduct. the
company has responded, and will continue to respond, appropriately to any such
conduct.
the companys internal review with respect to finite
reinsurance considered finite products the company both purchased and sold. the
company has completed its review with respect to the identified finite products
purchased and sold, and has concluded that no adjustment to previously issued
financial statements is required.
except as settled as previously disclosed, the
industry-wide investigations described above are ongoing, as are the companys
efforts to cooperate with the authorities, and the various authorities could
ask that additional work be performed or reach conclusions different from the
companys. accordingly, it would be premature to reach any conclusions as to
the likely outcome of these matters.
four putative class action
lawsuits are pending against a number of insurance brokers and insurers,
including the company and/or certain of its affiliates, by plaintiffs who
allegedly purchased insurance products through one or more of the defendant
brokers. plaintiffs allege that various insurance brokers conspired with each
other and with various insurers, including the company and/or certain of its
affiliates, to artificially inflate premiums, allocate brokerage customers and
rig bids for insurance products offered to those customers. the complaints are
captioned: redwood oil company v.
marsh& mclennan
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
15.
contingencies, commitments and guarantees (continued)
companies,inc., et al. (n.d. ill. jan.21, 2005), boros v. marsh& mclennan companies,inc.,
et al. (n.d. cal. feb.4, 2005), mulcahy v. arthur j. gallagher& co., et al.
(d.n.j. feb.23, 2005) and golden gate
bridge, highway, and transportation district v. marsh& mclennan
companies,inc., et al. (d.n.j. feb.23, 2005). to the
extent they were not originally filed there, the federal class actions were
transferred by the judicial panel on multidistrict litigation to the united
states district court for the district of new jersey and have been consolidated
with other class actions under the caption
in re insurance brokerage antitrust litigation, a multidistrict
litigation proceeding in that district. on august1, 2005, various
plaintiffs, including the four named plaintiffs in the above-referenced class
actions, filed an amended consolidated class action complaint naming various
brokers and insurers, including the company and certain of its affiliates, on
behalf of a putative nationwide class of policyholders. the complaint includes
causes of action under the sherman act, the racketeer influenced and corrupt
organizations act (rico), state common law and the laws of the various states
prohibiting antitrust violations. plaintiffs seek monetary damages, including
punitive damages and trebled damages, permanent injunctive relief, restitution,
including disgorgement of profits, interest and costs, including attorneys
fees. on november29, 2005, all defendants moved to dismiss the complaint
for failure to state a claim. oral arguments on the defendants motion to dismiss
were heard on july26, 2006. on october3, 2006, the court ruled that
the complaint failed to plead actionable claims under the sherman act or rico,
provided plaintiffs an opportunity to replead those claims and reserved
decision with respect to remaining state law claims. on november30, 2006,
defendants renewed their motions to dismiss. on february13, 2006, the
named plaintiffs moved to certify a nationwide class consisting of all persons
who between august26, 1994 and the date of class certification engaged
the services of a broker defendant (or related entity) in connection with the
procurement or renewal of insurance and who entered into or renewed a contract
of insurance with one or more of the insurer defendants, including the company.
the renewed motion to dismiss and class certification motion remain pending.
also, additional individual actions have been brought in state and federal
courts against the company involving allegations similar to those in in re insurance brokerage antitrust litigation and further
actions may be brought. the company believes that all of these lawsuits have no
merit and intends to defend vigorously.
in addition to those described above, the company is
involved in numerous lawsuits, not involving asbestos and environmental claims,
arising mostly in the ordinary course of business operations either as a
liability insurer defending third-party claims brought against policyholders,
or as an insurer defending claims brought against it relating to coverage or
the companys business practices. while the ultimate resolution of these legal
proceedings could be material to the companys results of operations in a
future period, in the opinion of the companys management, none would likely have
a material adverse effect on the companys financial condition or liquidity.
on july23, 2004, the
company announced that it was seeking guidance from the staff of the division
of corporation finance of the sec with respect to the appropriate purchase
accounting treatment for certain second quarter 2004 adjustments totaling $1.63
billion ($1.07 billion after-tax). the company recorded these adjustments as
charges in its consolidated statement of income in the second quarter of 2004.
through an informal comment process, the staff of the division of corporation
finance has subsequently asked for further information, which the company has
provided. specifically, the staff has asked for information concerning the
companys adjustments to certain of spcs insurance reserves and reserves for
reinsurance recoverables and premiums due from policyholders, and how those
adjustments may relate to spcs reserves for periods prior to the merger of spc
and tpc. after reviewing the staffs
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
15.
contingencies, commitments and guarantees (continued)
questions
and comments, the company continues to believe that its accounting treatment
for these adjustments is appropriate. if, however, the staff disagrees, some or
all of the adjustments being discussed may not be recorded as charges in the
companys consolidated statement of income, thereby increasing net income for
the second quarter and full year 2004 and increasing shareholders equity at december31,
2006, 2005 and 2004, in each case by the approximate after-tax amount of the
change. the effect on tangible shareholders equity (adjusted for the effects
of deferred taxes associated with goodwill and intangible assets) at december31,
2006, 2005 and 2004 would not be material. increases to goodwill and deferred
tax liabilities would be reflected on the companys balance sheet as of april1,
2004, either due to purchase accounting or adjustment of spcs reserves prior
to the merger of spc and tpc. on may3, 2006, the company received a
letter from the division of enforcement of the sec (the division) advising
the company that it is conducting an inquiry relating to the second quarter
2004 adjustments and the april1, 2004 merger of spc and tpc. the company
is cooperating with the divisions requests for information.
other commitments
and guarantees
commitments
investment
commitmentsthe company has long-term
commitments to fund venture capital investments through its subsidiary, st.
paul venture capital vi, llc, through new and existing partnerships and certain
other venture capital entities. the companys total future estimated
obligations related to its venture capital investments were $87 million and
$128 million at december31, 2006 and 2005, respectively. the company also
has unfunded commitments to partnerships, joint ventures and certain private
equity investments in which it invests. these additional commitments were $1.31
billion and $803 million at december31, 2006 and 2005, respectively.
spcs sale of minetin may1997,
spc completed the sale of its insurance brokerage operation, minet, to aon
corporation. spc agreed to indemnify aon against any future claims for
professional liability and other specified events that occurred or existed
prior to the sale. the company assumed obligations related to this indemnification
upon consummation of the merger. the company monitors its exposure under these
claims on a regular basis. the company believes reserves for reported claims
are adequate, but it does not have information on unreported claims to estimate
a range of additional liability. from 1997 to 2004, spc purchased insurance to
cover a portion of its exposure to such claims. under the sale agreement, spc
also committed to acquire a minimum level of reinsurance brokerage services
from aon through 2012. that commitment requires the company to make a
contractual payment to aon to the extent such minimum level of service is not
acquired. the maximum annual amount payable to aon for such services and any
such contractual payment related to that commitment is $20 million.
guarantees
the company has certain contingent obligations for
guarantees related to agency loans and letters of credit, issuance of debt
securities, third party loans related to venture capital investments and
various indemnifications related to the sale of business entities.
during 2006, the company entered into construction
loan and performance guarantees relating to an investment in a real estate
development joint venture. the maximum obligation for the guarantees was $55
million.
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
15.
contingencies, commitments and guarantees (continued)
in the ordinary course of
selling business entities to third parties, the company has agreed to indemnify
purchasers for losses arising out of breaches of representations and warranties
with respect to the business entities being sold, covenants and obligations of
the company and/or its subsidiaries following the close, and in certain cases
obligations arising from undisclosed liabilities, adverse reserve development
or certain named litigation. such indemnification provisions generally survive
for periods ranging from 12 months following the applicable closing date to the
expiration of the relevant statutes of limitations, or in some cases agreed
upon term limitations. as of december31, 2006, the aggregate amount of
the companys obligation for those indemnifications that are quantifiable
related to sales of business entities was $1.85 billion. certain of these
contingent obligations are subject to deductibles which have to be incurred by
the obligee before the company is obligated to make payments. included in the
indemnification obligations at december31, 2006 was $187 million related
to the companys variable interest in camperdown uk limited, which spc sold in december2003.
the companys variable interest results from an agreement to indemnify the
purchaser in the event a specified reserve deficiency develops, a
reserve-related foreign exchange impact occurs, or a foreign tax adjustment is
imposed on a pre-sale reporting period. the fair value of this obligation as of
december31, 2006 was $65 million, which was included in other
liabilities on the companys consolidated balance sheet.
16. related party
transactions
prior to citigroups distribution to its stockholders
of a portion of its ownership in tpc in august2002, tpc provided and
purchased services to and from citigroup affiliated companies, including
facilities management, banking and financial functions, benefit coverages, data
processing services, and short-term investment pool management services.
charges for these shared services were allocated at cost. in connection with
the citigroup distribution, tpc and citigroup and its affiliates entered into a
transition services agreement for the provision of certain of these services,
tradename and trademark and similar agreements related to the use of
trademarks, logos and tradenames and an amendment to the march26, 2002
intercompany agreement with citigroup. during the first quarter of 2002,
citigroup provided investment advisory services on an allocated cost basis,
consistent with prior years. on august6, 2002, tpc entered into an
investment management agreement, which was applied retroactively to april1,
2002, with an affiliate of citigroup whereby the affiliate of citigroup
provided investment advisory and administrative services to tpc with respect to
its entire investment portfolio for a period of two years and at fees mutually
agreed upon, including a component based on investment performance. this
agreement was modified and extended through the first quarter of 2005, at which
time it was terminated. charges incurred related to this agreement were $2
million and $58 million for the years ended december31, 2005 and 2004,
respectively. tpc and citigroup also agreed upon the allocation or transfer of
certain other liabilities and assets, and rights and obligations in furtherance
of the separation of operations and ownership as a result of the citigroup
distribution. the net effect of these allocations and transfers, in the opinion
of management, was not significant to the companys results of operations or
financial condition.
in the ordinary course of
business, the company purchases and sells securities through formerly
affiliated broker-dealers. these transactions are conducted on an arms-length
basis. commissions are not paid for the purchase and sale of debt securities.
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
17. restructuring
activities
during the second quarter
of 2004, the companys management approved and committed to plans to terminate
and relocate certain employees and to exit certain activities. the cost of
these actions has been recognized as a liability and is included in either the
allocation of the purchase price or recorded as part of general and
administrative expenses. the following tables summarize the companys costs
related to these plans.
balanceat
original
december31,
(inmillions)
accruedcosts
payments
adjustments
restructuring costs included in
the allocation of the purchase price:
employee
termination and relocation costs
$
$
(43
)
$
(3
)
$
costs to exit
leases
(1
)
other exit costs
(2
)
total included in the allocation of purchase price
(46
)
employee termination costs
included in general and administrative expenses:
business insurance
(4
)
(9
)
financial, professional and international
insurance
(1
)
personal insurance
(1
)
total included in general and administrative expenses
(5
)
(10
)
total
restructuring costs
$
$
(51
)
$
(8
)
$
balanceat
balanceat
december31,
december31,
(inmillions)
payments
adjustments
restructuring costs included in
the allocation of the purchase price:
employee
termination and relocation costs
$
$
(23
)
$
$
costs to exit
leases
(3
)
(1
)
other exit costs
(2
)
total included in the allocation of purchase price
(28
)
employee termination costs
included in general and administrative expenses:
business insurance
(15
)
personal insurance
(2
)
total included in
general and administrative expenses
(17
)
total restructuring
costs
$
$
(45
)
$
$
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
17.
restructuring activities (continued)
balanceat
balanceat
december31,
december31,
(inmillions)
payments
adjustments
restructuring costs included in
the allocation of the purchase price:
employee
termination and relocation costs
$
$
(7
)
$
$
costs to exit
leases
(2
)
total included in the allocation of purchase price
(9
)
employee termination costs
included in general and administrative expenses:
business insurance
(6
)
personal insurance
(1
)
total included in general and administrative
expenses
(7
)
total
restructuring costs
$
$
(16
)
$
$
18. noncash investing and
financing activities
there were no significant noncash financing or
investing activities during the year ended december31, 2006.
in 2005, the company remarketed senior notes that were
originally issued in 2002, resetting the interest rate from 5.25% to 5.01%. there
were no other significant noncash financing or investing activities during the
year ended december31, 2005.
there were no significant
noncash financing or investing activities during the year ended december31,
2004, other than the acquisition of spc which resulted in net assets assumed of
$8.76 billion (at fair value).
19. merger
on april1, 2004, tpc merged with a subsidiary of
spc, as a result of which tpc became a wholly-owned subsidiary of the st. paul
travelers companies,inc. for accounting purposes, this transaction was
accounted for as a reverse acquisition with tpc treated as the accounting
acquirer. accordingly, this transaction was accounted for as a purchase
business combination, using tpcs historical financial information and applying
fair value estimates to the acquired assets, liabilities and commitments of spc
as of april1, 2004.
on an unaudited pro forma
basis for the year ended december31, 2004, the combined revenues of tpc
and spc totaled $25.20 billion, net income totaled $1.08 billion, and basic and
diluted net income per share was $1.61 and $1.58, respectively. this combined
information reflects pro forma purchase accounting adjustments as if the
acquisition had been consummated as of january1, 2004. this pro forma
information is not necessarily indicative of what would have occurred had the
acquisition and related transactions been made on that date, or of future
results of the company.
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
19.
merger (continued)
identification and
valuation of intangible assets subject to amortization
intangible
assets subject to amortization (excluding the nuveen investments intangible
assets) were as follows:
(inmillions)
amount
assignedas
ofapril1,
weighted-
average
amortization
period
major
intangible asset class
customer-related (a)
$
7.8years
marketing-related
2.0 years
fair value adjustment on claims and claim adjustment
expense reserves and reinsurance recoverables (b)
30.0 years
total
$
(a) primarily includes
customer-related insurance intangibles based on rates derived from expected
business retention and profitability levels.
(b) see
note 5 for further discussion of the fair value adjustment.
20. discontinued
operations
in 2005, the company
completed the divestiture of its 78% equity interest in nuveen investments,
which constituted its asset management segment, through a series of
transactions. the divestiture resulted in net pretax cash proceeds of $2.40
billion. in 2005, the company recorded a pretax gain on disposal of $345
million ($224 million after-tax), and a net operating loss from discontinued
operations of $663 million, consisting primarily of $710 million of tax expense
which resulted from the difference between the tax basis and the gaap carrying
value of the companys investment in nuveen investments, partially offset by
the companys share of nuveen investments net income for 2005.
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
21. consolidating financial statements of the st. paul
travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries
the following consolidating financial statements of
the company have been prepared pursuant to rule3-10 of regulation
s-x. these consolidating financial statements have been prepared from the
companys financial information on the same basis of accounting as the
consolidated financial statements. the st. paul travelers companies,inc.
has fully and unconditionally guaranteed certain debt obligations of tpc, its
wholly-owned subsidiary, which totaled $2.49 billion as of december31,
2006.
prior to the merger, tpc fully and unconditionally
guaranteed the payment of all principal, premiums, if any, and interest on
certain debt obligations of its wholly-owned subsidiary tighi. the st. paul
travelers companies,inc. has fully and unconditionally guaranteed such
guarantee obligations of tpc. tpc is deemed to have no assets or operations
independent of tighi. consolidating financial information for tighi has not
been presented herein because such financial information would be substantially
the same as the financial information provided for tpc.
the amounts shown in the tpc and other subsidiaries
columns in the following consolidating financial statements are not directly
comparable between 2005 and 2004. during 2005, the company combined the
previously separate st. paul insurance group and travelers property casualty
reinsurance pools, forming the new st. paul travelers reinsurance pool effective
july1, 2005, retroactive to january1, 2005. as a result, the tpc
and other subsidiaries columns of the consolidating financial statements for
2005 reflect the impact of allocations of revenues, losses and expenses made
pursuant to the respective entities participation level in the newly combined
pool.
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
21. consolidating financial statements of the st. paul
travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries (continued)
consolidating
statement of income (unaudited)
for the year ended december31, 2006
(inmillions)
tpc
other
subsidiaries
st.paul
travelers(1)
eliminations
consolidated
revenues
premiums
$
13,861
$
6,899
$
$
$
20,760
net investment
income
2,357
1,059
(2
)
3,517
fee income
net realized
investment gains (losses)
(11
)
(24
)
other revenues
(11
)
total revenues
16,900
8,070
(13
)
25,090
claims and expenses
claims and claim
adjustment expenses
8,116
4,128
12,244
amortization of
deferred acquisition costs
2,228
1,111
3,339
general and
administrative expenses
2,286
1,128
(11
)
3,458
interest expense
(2
)
total claims and expenses
12,770
6,367
(13
)
19,365
income
before income taxes
4,130
1,703
(108
)
5,725
income tax
expense
1,118
(37
)
1,517
equity in
earnings of subsidiaries, net oftax
4,279
(4,279
)
net income
$
3,012
$
1,267
$
4,208
$
(4,279
)
$
4,208
(1) the
st. paul travelers companies,inc., excluding its subsidiaries.
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
21. consolidating financial
statements of the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries
(continued)
consolidating
statement of income (unaudited)
for the year ended december31, 2005
(inmillions)
tpc
other
subsidiaries
st.paul
travelers(1)
eliminations
consolidated
revenues
premiums
$
13,494
$
6,847
$
$
$
20,341
net investment
income
2,191
3,165
fee income
net realized
investment gains (losses)
(21
)
other revenues
(11
)
total revenues
16,547
7,794
(11
)
24,365
claims and expenses
claims and claim
adjustment expenses
9,835
5,092
14,927
amortization of
deferred acquisition costs
2,038
1,214
3,252
general and
administrative expenses
2,198
1,010
(11
)
3,229
interest expense
(2
)
total claims and expenses
14,213
7,314
(11
)
21,694
income
(loss) from continuing operations before income taxes
2,334
(143
)
2,671
income tax
expense (benefit)
(27
)
equity in
earnings of subsidiaries, net oftax
2,215
(2,215
)
income
(loss) from continuing operations
1,769
2,099
(2,215
)
2,061
discontinued operations
operating loss, net of taxes
(82
)
(581
)
(663
)
gain on disposal, net of taxes
income (loss)
from discontinued operations
(477
)
(439
)
net income
$
1,769
$
$
1,622
$
(2,215
)
$
1,622
(1) the
st. paul travelers companies,inc., excluding its subsidiaries.
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
21. consolidating financial
statements of the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries
(continued)
consolidating
statement of income (unaudited)
for the year ended december31, 2004
(inmillions)
tpc
other
subsidiaries
st.paul
travelers(1)
eliminations
consolidated
revenues
premiums
$
13,682
$
5,356
$
$
$
19,038
net investment
income
2,063
2,663
fee income
net realized
investment gains (losses)
(139
)
(75
)
(39
)
other revenues
(10
)
total revenues
16,732
5,888
(66
)
(10
)
22,544
claims and expenses
claims and claim
adjustment expenses
9,266
6,173
15,439
amortization of
deferred acquisition costs
2,188
2,978
general and
administrative expenses
1,955
(4
)
2,945
interest expense
(6
)
total claims and expenses
13,552
7,905
(10
)
21,598
income
(loss) from continuing operations before income taxes
3,180
(2,017
)
(217
)
income tax
expense (benefit)
(715
)
(72
)
equity in
earnings (loss) of subsidiaries, net of tax
(1
)
1,027
(1,026
)
minority
interest, net of tax
income
(loss) from continuing operations
2,314
(1,303
)
(1,026
)
discontinued operations
operating income, net of taxes
income from
discontinued operations
net income (loss)
$
2,314
$
(1,288
)
$
$
(1,026
)
$
(1) the st. paul travelers
companies,inc., excluding its subsidiaries.
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
21. consolidating financial statements of the st. paul
travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries (continued)
consolidating
balance sheet (unaudited)
at december31, 2006
(inmillions)
tpc
other
subsidiaries
st.paul
travelers(1)
eliminations
consolidated
assets
fixed maturities,
available for sale at fair value(including $1,674 subject to securities
lending) (amortized cost $62,244)
$
39,736
$
22,511
$
$
$
62,666
equity securities,
at fair value (cost $436)
real estate
short-term
securities
2,623
1,338
4,938
other investments
2,019
1,270
3,398
total
investments
44,712
25,984
1,572
72,268
cash
investment income
accrued
(3
)
premiums
receivable
3,916
2,265
6,181
reinsurance
recoverables
12,963
4,857
17,820
ceded unearned
premiums
1,013
1,243
deferred
acquisition costs
1,323
1,615
deferred tax asset
1,037
1,536
contractholder
receivables
4,541
5,023
goodwill
2,412
1,026
3,438
intangible assets
investment in
subsidiaries
26,946
(26,946
)
other assets
1,921
(202
)
2,587
total
assets
$
74,937
$
37,152
$
28,823
$
(27,151
)
$
113,761
liabilities
claims and claim
adjustment expense
reserves
$
38,752
$
20,536
$
$
$
59,288
unearned premium
reserves
7,655
3,573
11,228
contractholder
payables
4,541
5,023
payables for
reinsurance premiums
debt
2,469
3,338
(202
)
5,760
other liabilities
4,449
1,846
(3
)
6,642
total
liabilities
58,150
26,993
3,688
(205
)
88,626
shareholders equity
preferred stock
savings planconvertible preferred stock (0.4 shares issued and outstanding)
common stock
(1,750.0 shares authorized; 678.3 shares issued and outstanding)
18,530
(745
)
18,530
additional paid-in
capital
9,910
7,711
(17,621
)
retained earnings
6,472
1,618
7,253
(8,090
)
7,253
accumulated other
changes in equity from nonowner sources
(490
)
treasury stock, at
cost (25.2 shares)
(1,229
)
(1,229
)
total
shareholders equity
16,787
10,159
25,135
(26,946
)
25,135
total
liabilities and shareholders equity
$
74,937
$
37,152
$
28,823
$
(27,151
)
$
113,761
(1) the
st. paul travelers companies,inc., excluding its subsidiaries.
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
21. consolidating financial
statements of the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries
(continued)
consolidating
balance sheet (unaudited)
at december 31, 2005
(inmillions)
tpc
other
subsidiaries
st.paul
travelers(1)
eliminations
consolidated
assets
fixed maturities,
available for sale at fair value(including $2,667 subject to securities
lending) (amortized cost $58,616)
$
37,582
$
20,957
$
$
$
58,983
equity securities,
at fair value (cost $538)
real estate
short-term
securities
2,142
1,551
1,109
4,802
other investments
1,808
1,273
3,171
total
investments
41,974
24,612
1,701
68,287
cash
investment income
accrued
(3
)
premiums
receivable
3,843
2,281
6,124
reinsurance
recoverables
14,966
4,608
19,574
ceded unearned
premiums
1,000
1,322
deferred
acquisition costs
1,218
1,527
deferred tax asset
1,330
2,062
contractholder
receivables
4,422
1,094
5,516
goodwill
2,412
1,030
3,442
intangible assets
investment in
subsidiaries
23,708
(23,708
)
other assets
2,292
(195
)
3,318
total
assets
$
74,380
$
36,667
$
26,046
$
(23,906
)
$
113,187
liabilities
claims and claim
adjustment expense
reserves
$
41,213
$
19,877
$
$
$
61,090
unearned premium
reserves
7,418
3,509
10,927
contractholder
payables
4,422
1,094
5,516
payables for
reinsurance premiums
debt
2,623
3,272
(192
)
5,850
other liabilities
4,297
2,017
(4
)
6,781
total
liabilities
60,255
27,082
3,743
(196
)
90,884
shareholders equity
preferred stock
savings planconvertible preferred stock (0.5 shares issued and outstanding)
common stock
(1,750.0 shares authorized; 693.4 shares issued and outstanding)
(24
)
18,096
(721
)
18,096
additional paid-in
capital
9,916
7,724
(17,640
)
retained earnings
3,835
1,154
3,750
(4,989
)
3,750
accumulated other
changes in equity from nonowner sources
(38
)
(360
)
treasury stock, at
cost (1.2 shares)
(47
)
(47
)
total
shareholders equity
14,125
9,585
22,303
(23,710
)
22,303
total
liabilities and shareholders equity
$
74,380
$
36,667
$
26,046
$
(23,906
)
$
113,187
(1) the st. paul travelers
companies,inc., excluding its subsidiaries.
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
21. consolidating financial statements of the st. paul
travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries (continued)
consolidating
statement of cash flows (unaudited)
for the year ended december31, 2006
(inmillions)
tpc
other
subsidiaries
st.paul
travelers(1)
eliminations
consolidated
cash
flows from operating activities
net income
$
3,012
$
1,267
$
4,208
$
(4,279
)
$
4,208
net adjustments to
reconcile net income to net cash provideby operating activities
(153
)
(4,085
)
4,279
net cash provided by
operating activities
2,859
1,792
4,774
cash flows from investing activities
proceeds from maturities of
fixed maturities
3,410
2,388
5,810
proceeds
from sales of investments:
fixed maturities
2,192
2,166
4,401
equity securities
purchases
of investments:
fixed maturities
(7,852
)
(5,960
)
(33
)
(13,845
)
equity securities
(11
)
(72
)
(83
)
real estate
(2
)
(73
)
(75
)
short-term securities,
(purchases) sales, net
(481
)
(85
)
other investments, net
securities transactions in
course of settlement
(92
)
other
(327
)
(325
)
net cash provided by
(used in) investing activities
(2,139
)
(1,079
)
(3,064
)
cash flows from financing activities
issuance of debt
payment of debt
(154
)
(652
)
(806
)
dividends paid to
shareholders
(702
)
(702
)
issuance of common
stockemployee share options
treasury stock
acquiredshare repurchase program
(1,103
)
(1,103
)
treasury stock acquirednet
employee share-based compensation
(17
)
(17
)
excess tax benefits from
share-based payment arrangements
dividends received by (paid
to) parent company
(375
)
(780
)
1,155
capital contributions and
loans between subsidiaries
(8
)
other
(2
)
net cash used in
financing activities
(531
)
(788
)
(274
)
(1,593
)
effect of exchange rate
changes on cash
net increase (decrease) in
cash
(70
)
cash at beginning of period
cash at end of period
$
$
$
$
$
supplemental disclosure of cash flow information
income taxes paid
(received)
$
$
$
(164
)
$
$
interest paid
$
$
$
$
$
(1) the st. paul
travelers companies,inc., excluding its subsidiaries.
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
21. consolidating financial
statements of the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries
(continued)
consolidating
statement of cash flows (unaudited)
for the year ended december31, 2005
(inmillions)
tpc
other
subsidiaries
st.paul
travelers(1)
eliminations
consolidated
cash
flows from operating activities
net income (loss)
$
1,769
$
$
1,622
$
(2,215
)
$
1,622
net adjustments to reconcile
net income to net cash providedby operating activities
(1,416
)
2,215
1,967
net cash provided by
operating activities of continuing operations
2,628
3,589
net cash provided by
operating activities of discontinued
operations
net cash provided by
operating activities
2,628
3,613
cash flows from investing activities
proceeds from maturities of
fixed maturities
2,944
1,996
4,952
proceeds
from sales of investments:
fixed maturities
3,095
1,918
5,192
equity securities
real estate
purchases
of investments:
fixed maturities
(9,417
)
(5,618
)
(1,011
)
(16,046
)
equity securities
(9
)
(54
)
(63
)
real estate
(7
)
(42
)
(49
)
short-term securities,
(purchases) sales, net
(982
)
other investments, net
securities transactions in
course of settlement
(583
)
(12
)
(595
)
other
(128
)
(4
)
(132
)
net cash used in
investing activities of continuing operations
(2,618
)
(1,015
)
(1,802
)
(5,435
)
net cash used in
investing activities of discontinued operations
(20
)
(20
)
net cash used in
investing activities
(2,618
)
(1,035
)
(1,802
)
(5,455
)
cash flows from financing activities
issuance of debt
payment of debt
(4
)
(811
)
(815
)
dividends to shareholders
(628
)
(628
)
issuance of common stockemployee
share options
issuance of common
stockmaturity of equity unit forward
contracts
treasury stock acquirednet
employee share-based compensation
(33
)
(33
)
dividends received by (paid
to) parent company
(860
)
(85
)
capital contributions and
loans between subsidiaries
(890
)
other
(3
)
(3
)
net cash used in
financing activities of continuing operations
(40
)
(19
)
(414
)
(473
)
net cash provided by
financing activities of discontinued operations
net cash used in
financing activities
(40
)
(15
)
(414
)
(469
)
effect of exchange rate
changes on cash
(5
)
(5
)
elimination of cash provided
by discontinued operations
(8
)
(8
)
net proceeds from sale of
discontinued operations
1,994
2,399
net increase (decrease) in
cash
(30
)
(16
)
cash at beginning of period
cash at end of period
$
$
$
$
$
supplemental disclosure of cash flow information
income taxes paid
(received)
$
$
$
(310
)
$
$
interest paid
$
$
$
$
$
(1) the st.
paul travelers companies,inc., excluding its subsidiaries.
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
21. consolidating financial
statements of the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries
(continued)
consolidating
statement of cash flows (unaudited)
for the year ended december31, 2004(1)
(inmillions)
tpc
other
subsidiaries
st.paul
travelers(2)
eliminations
consolidated
cash flows from operating activities
net income (loss)
$
2,314
$
(1,288
)
$
$
(1,026
)
$
net adjustments to
reconcile net income to net cash providedby operating activities
1,608
2,943
(1,465
)
1,025
4,111
net cash provided by
(used in) operating activities of continuingoperations
3,922
1,655
(510
)
(1
)
5,066
net cash provided by
operating activities of discontinued operations
net cash provided by
(used in) operating activities
3,922
1,830
(510
)
(1
)
5,241
cash flows from investing activities
proceeds from maturities of
fixed maturities
3,947
1,673
5,621
proceeds from sales of investments:
fixed maturities
4,381
3,564
7,945
equity securities
purchases of investments:
fixed maturities
(9,863
)
(6,659
)
(16,522
)
equity securities
(55
)
(38
)
(1
)
(94
)
real estate
(22
)
(22
)
short-term securities,
(purchases) sales, net
(556
)
(1,271
)
(87
)
(1,913
)
other investments, net
securities transactions in
course of settlement
(877
)
(231
)
(1,108
)
net cash acquired in merger
(19
)
other
net cash provided by
(used in) investing activities of continuingoperations
(2,228
)
(2,393
)
(27
)
(4,647
)
net cash used in
investing activities of discontinued operations
(139
)
(139
)
net cash provided by
(used in) investing activities
(2,228
)
(2,532
)
(27
)
(4,786
)
cash flows from financing
activities
issuance of debt
payment of debt
(54
)
(173
)
(227
)
dividends to shareholders
(81
)
(561
)
(642
)
issuance of common
stock-employee share options
treasury stock acquirednet
employee share-based compensation
(22
)
(1
)
(23
)
dividends received by (paid
to) parent company
(1,690
)
(150
)
1,840
capital contributions and
loans between subsidiaries
(940
)
repurchase of minority
interest of subsidiary
(76
)
(76
)
other
net cash provided by
(used in) financing activities of continuing operations
(1,880
)
(516
)
net cash used in
financing activities of discontinued operations
(24
)
(24
)
net cash provided by
(used in) financing activities
(1,880
)
(540
)
effect of exchange rate
changes on cash
elimination of cash
provided by discontinued operations
(12
)
(12
)
net increase (decrease) in
cash
(186
)
(90
)
cash at beginning of period
cash at end of period
$
$
$
$
$
supplemental disclosure of cash
flow information
income taxes paid
(received)
$
$
$
(219
)
$
$
interest paid
$
$
$
$
$
(1) see note
3.
(2) the st. paul travelers companies,inc., excluding
its subsidiaries.
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
22. selected
quarterly financial data (unaudited)
2006(inmillions,exceptpersharedata)
first
quarter
second
quarter
third
quarter
fourth
quarter
total
total revenues
$
6,050
$
6,255
$
6,316
$
6,469
$
25,090
total expenses
4,712
4,911
4,862
4,880
19,365
income before
income taxes
1,338
1,344
1,454
1,589
5,725
income tax
expense
1,517
net income
$
1,006
$
$
1,043
$
1,189
$
4,208
net income per share:(1)
basic
$
1.45
$
1.40
$
1.52
$
1.75
$
6.12
diluted
1.41
1.36
1.47
1.68
5.91
2005(inmillions,exceptpersharedata)
first
quarter
second
quarter
third
quarter
fourth
quarter
total
total revenues
$
6,105
$
6,037
$
6,042
$
6,181
$
24,365
total expenses
4,917
4,743
6,050
5,984
21,694
income (loss)
from continuing operations before income taxes
1,188
1,294
(8
)
2,671
income tax
expense (benefit)
(83
)
income from
continuing operations
2,061
income (loss)
from discontinued operations
(665
)
(439
)
net income
$
$
1,069
$
$
$
1,622
net income per share:(1)
basic
$
0.31
$
1.59
$
0.24
$
0.26
$
2.39
diluted
0.31
1.52
0.23
0.26
2.33
(1) due to the averaging of
shares, quarterly earnings per share may not add to the total for the full
year.
item9. changes
in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and financial disclosure
not applicable.
item9a. controls
and procedures
the company maintains disclosure controls and
procedures (as that term is defined in rules13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e)
under the securities exchange act of 1934, as amended (exchange act)) that are
designed to ensure that information required to be disclosed in the companys
reports under the exchange act is recorded, processed, summarized and reported
within the time periods specified in the securities and exchange commissions rulesand
forms, and that such information is accumulated and communicated to the companys
management, including its chief executive officer and chief financial officer,
as appropriate, to allow timely decisions regarding required disclosures. any
controls and procedures, no matter how well designed and operated, can provide
only reasonable assurance of achieving the desired control objectives. the
companys management, with the participation of the companys chief executive
officer and chief financial officer, has evaluated the effectiveness of the
design and operation of the companys disclosure controls and procedures as of december31,
2006. based upon that evaluation and subject to the foregoing, the companys
chief executive officer and chief financial officer concluded that the design
and operation of the companys disclosure controls and procedures provided
reasonable assurance that the disclosure controls and procedures are effective
to accomplish their objectives.
in addition, except as
described above, there was no change in the companys internal control over
financial reporting (as that term is defined in rules13a-15(f)and
15d-15(f)under the exchange act) that occurred during the quarter
ended december31, 2006 that has materially affected, or is reasonably
likely to materially affect, the companys internal control over financial
reporting.
managements report
on internal control over financial reporting
management of the company is responsible for
establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over financial
reporting. the companys internal control over financial reporting is designed
to provide reasonable assurances regarding the reliability of financial
reporting and the preparation of the consolidated financial statements of the
company in accordance with u.s. generally accepted accounting principles. the
companys accounting policies and internal controls over financial reporting,
established and maintained by management, are under the general oversight of
the companys audit committee.
the companys
internal control over financial reporting includes those policies and
procedures that:
pertain
to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly
reflect the transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company;
provide
reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit
preparation of financial statements in accordance with u.s. generally accepted
accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures are being made only
in accordance with authorizations of the companys management and directors;
and
provide
reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized
acquisition, use or disposition of assets that could have a material effect on
the financial statements.
because of its inherent limitations, internal control
over financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. also,
projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are subject to
the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions,
or that the degree or compliance with the policies or procedures may
deteriorate.
management has assessed the companys internal control
over financial reporting as of december31, 2006. the standard measures
adopted by management in making its evaluation are the measures in the
internal-control integrated framework published by the committee of sponsoring
organizations of the treadway commission.
based upon its assessment, management has concluded
that the companys internal control over financial reporting is effective at december31,
2006, and that there were no material weaknesses in the companys internal
control over financial reporting as of that date.
kpmg llp, an independent registered public accounting
firm, which has audited and reported on the consolidated financial statements
contained in this form10-k, has issued its written attestation
report on managements assessment of the companys internal control over
financial reporting which follows this report.
report of
independent registered public accounting firm
the board of directors and stockholders
the st. paul travelers companies,inc.:
we have audited managements assessment, included in
the accompanying managements report
on internal control over financial reporting,
that the st. paul travelers companies,inc. and
subsidiaries maintained effective internal control over financial reporting as
of december31, 2006, based on criteria
established in internal controlintegrated framework issued by the committee of
sponsoring organizations of the treadway commission (coso). the st. paul travelers companies,inc.
and subsidiaries management is responsible for maintaining effective internal
control over financial reporting and for its assessment of the effectiveness of
internal control over financial reporting. our responsibility is to express an
opinion on managements assessment and an opinion on the effectiveness of the
companys internal control over financial reporting based on our audit.
we conducted our audit in accordance with the
standards of the public company accounting oversight board (united states).
those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable
assurance about whether effective internal control over financial reporting was
maintained in all material respects. our audit included obtaining an
understanding of internal control over financial reporting, evaluating
managements assessment, testing and evaluating the design and operating
effectiveness of internal control, and performing such other procedures as we
considered necessary in the circumstances. we believe that our audit provides a
reasonable basis for our opinion.
a companys internal control over financial reporting
is a process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability
of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external
purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. a companys
internal control over financial reporting includes those policies and
procedures that (1)pertain to the maintenance of records that, in
reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and
dispositions of the assets of the company; (2)provide reasonable
assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of
financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting
principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the company are being made
only in accordance with authorizations of management and directors of the
company; and (3)provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or
timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the
companys assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements.
because of its inherent limitations, internal control
over financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. also,
projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are subject to
the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions,
or that the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may
deteriorate.
in our opinion, managements assessment that the st.
paul travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries maintained effective
internal control over financial reporting as of december31, 2006, is
fairly stated, in all material respects, based on criteria established in internal controlintegrated framework issued by
the committee of sponsoring organizations of the treadway commission (coso). also, in our opinion, the st.
paul travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries maintained, in all
material respects, effective internal control over financial reporting as of december31,
2006, based on criteria established in
internal controlintegrated framework issued by the committee of sponsoring
organizations of the treadway commission (coso).
we also have audited, in accordance with the standards
of the public company accounting oversight board (united states), the consolidated balance sheet of the st.
paul travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries as of december31,
2006 and 2005, and the related consolidated
statement of income, changes in shareholders equity, and cash flows for each
of the years in the three-year period ended december31, 2006, and our
report dated february23, 2007 expressed
an unqualified opinion on those
consolidated financial statements.
/s/kpmg llp
kpmg
llp
minneapolis, minnesota
february23, 2007
item9b. other
information
not applicable.
partiii
item10. directors
and executive officers of the registrant
executive officers
of the company
set
forth below is information concerning the companys executive officers as of february23,
2007.
name
age
office
jay s. fishman
chairman of the board of
directors, chief executive officer and president
jay s. benet
vice chairman and chief
financial officer
irwin r. ettinger
vice chairman
charles j. clarke
vice chairman
william h. heyman
vice chairman and chief
investment officer
brian w. maclean
executive vice president
and chief operating officer
andy f. bessette
executivevicepresidentandchiefadministrativeofficer
kenneth f.
spence,iii
executive vice president
and general counsel
doreen spadorcia
executive vice
presidentclaim services
joseph p.
lacher,jr.
executive vice
presidentpersonal insurance
john j. albano
executive vice
presidentbusiness insurance
samuel g. liss
executive vice
presidentstrategic development and financial, professional&
international insurance
kathleen l. preston
executive vice presidententerprise
development
william a. bloom
senior vice president and chief information officer
jay s. fishman, 54,
has been chairman since september2005 and chief executive officer and
president of the company since joining spc in october2001. he held the
additional title of chairman of spc from october2001 until the merger.
prior to october2001, mr.fishman was chief operating officer of
finance and risk for citigroup inc, where he was responsible for coordinating
all risk and financial functions throughout that company. he was also then
serving as chief executive officer and president of tighi (since 1998) and as
chairman (from march2000 to january2001), and as head of citigroups
global insurance businesses and the consumer business in japan and western
europe. mr.fishman held several key executive posts at primerica,
travelers and citigroup from 1989 to october2001.
jay s. benet, 54,
has been vice chairman and chief financial officer since august2005, and
before that, he was executive vice president and chief financial officer of the
company since the merger, and from february2002 until the merger, he held
those same offices at tpc. from march2001 until january2002, mr.benet
was the worldwide head of financial planning, analysis and reporting at
citigroup and chief financial officer for citigroups global consumer europe,
middle east and africa unit between april2000 and march2001. before
that, mr.benet spent 10 years in various executive positions with
travelers life& annuity, including chief financial officer of
travelers life& annuity and executive vice president, group annuity
from december1998 to april2000, and senior vice president group
annuity from december1996 to december1998. prior to joining
travelers life& annuity, mr.benet was a partner of coopers&
lybrand (now pricewaterhousecoopers).
irwin r. ettinger,
68, has been vice chairman of the company since the merger. prior to that time,
he was vice chairman of tpc since june2002. mr.ettinger served as
the chief accounting and tax
officer for citigroup from
1998 to may2002 and held other positions of increasing responsibility
since joining citigroup in 1987. he joined citigroup from arthur young&
co. (now ernst& young) where he was a partner for 18 years.
charles j. chuck clarke, 71,
has been vice chairman of the company since the merger at which time he was
serving in the roles of president, vice chairman and director of travelers
property casualty corp. mr.clarke joined travelers in 1958 as an
assistant underwriter. during his tenure at travelers, mr.clarke progressed
through positions of increasing responsibility. of note, he was appointed
senior vice president for the national accounts groups property-casualty
business in 1985 and subsequently took on responsibility as chairman of
commercial lines in 1990.
william h. heyman,
58, has been vice chairman since may2005, and before that, he was
executive vice president and chief investment officer of the company since the
merger. prior to the merger, he held the same offices with spc since he joined
spc in may2002. mr.heyman held various executive positions with
citigroup from 1995 through 2002, including the position of chairman of
citigroup investments from 2000 to 2002. prior to joining citigroup in 1995, mr.heyman
was, successively, a managing director of salomon brothers; director of the
division of market regulation of the u.s. securities and exchange commission;
and a managing director of smith barney.
brian w. maclean,
53, has been executive vice president and chief operating officer since may2005.
prior to that, he had been co-chief operating officer of the company since february1,
2005. before that, he was executive vice president, claim services for the
company, and prior thereto, for tpc. prior to that, mr.maclean served as
president of select accounts for tighi from july1999 to january2002.
he also served as chief financial officer of claim services from march1993
to june1996. from june1996 to july1999, mr.maclean was
chief financial officer for commercial. he joined tighi in 1988.
andy f. bessette,
53, has been executive vice president and chief administrative officer of the
company since the merger, and prior to that, he held the same offices with spc
since joining spc in january2002. before that, he was vice president of
corporate real estate and services for tpc. from 1980 to december2001, mr.bessette
held a number of management positions at tighi.
kenneth f. spence,iii, 51,
has been executive vice president and general counsel of the company since january2005.
from august2004 to january2005, he was senior vice president and
general counsel. prior to that, mr.spence served in several leadership
positions in the companys legal services group, and from april1998 until
the merger, in spcs legal services group. mr.spence joined spc in april1998,
upon spcs merger with usf&g corporation, where he had served as legal
counsel.
doreen spadorcia, 49,
has been executive vice presidentclaim, since march2, 2005. prior to
that, she was president and chief executive officer of bond operations for the
company since the merger and, before that, for tpc since june2002. from
1994 to may2002, she managed the tpc bond claim operation and served as
general counsel of that business unit. she joined tighi in 1986 as a claim
attorney.
joseph p. lacher,jr.,
37, has been executive vice president of personal insurance for the company
since january2005 and prior to that, he had been senior vice president of
the company in charge of those operations. prior to the merger, he was
executive vice presidentpersonal for tpc. before that, he was senior vice
president of product& actuarial for tpcs personal insurance
operations since april2001. mr.lacher was senior vice president of
personal strategic distribution for tighi from april1999 to april2001,
and from april1996 to april1999, he was chief financial officer of
select accounts. mr.lacher joined tighi in 1991.
john j. albano, 57, has been executive vice president of
the company since november2005, and he is currently executive vice
president for business insurance. in 1998 he assumed the position of chief
underwriting
officer and chief operating officer for national accounts, and was promoted to
president and ceo for national accounts in 2000 and commercial accounts in
2005. prior to that time, he served as regional vice president of the northeast
region from 1987-1997. he joined travelers in 1971, working in commercial
lines underwriting and marketing on long island.
samuel g. liss, 50, has been
executive vice presidentstrategic development and financial, professional&
international insurance of the company since september2006. prior to that
date, he was executive vice president of business development since he joined
the company in february2003. in 2002, he advised the st. paul companies
in connection with its formation of platinum underwriters holdings, ltd, a
nyse-listed bermuda reinsurance company which succeeded the st. paul companies
former assumed reinsurance operation. mr.liss served as managing director
in the financial institutions group of credit suisse first boston from 1994 to
2001.
kathleen l. preston, 44, has
been executive vice presidententerprise development since joining the company
in october2005. prior to that time, she was president of the retail
annuities division and also served in various other leadership positions at
travelers insurance company, a former affiliate of the company. she also served
as senior vice president of insurance sales and operations for fleet financial
group from 1995 to 1997.
william a. bloom, 43, has been
senior vice president and chief information officer for the company since the
merger. in 2006 he was given the additional responsibility for insurance
operations, which includes the policyholder and agency service centers,
underwriting support and policy processing, agency operations and billing. prior
to joining travelers as its chief information officer in 2003, mr.bloom
was a partner in the financial services practice at accenture. he also served
previously as a vice president at hartford life, responsible for business
technology services.
the section16(a)beneficial ownership
reporting compliance section of the companys proxy statement relating to its
annual meeting of shareholders to be held may1, 2007 is incorporated
herein by reference.
the election of directorsnominees
for election as directors section of the proxy statement relating to the
annual meeting of shareholders to be held may1, 2007 is incorporated
herein by reference.
code of ethics
the company has adopted a
code of business conduct and ethics (code of ethics) that applies to all
employees, including executive officers, and to directors. the code of ethics
is available on the corporate governance pageof the companys internet
website at www.stpaultravelers.com.
if the company ever were to amend or waive any provision of its code of ethics
that applies to the companys principal executive officer, principal financial
officer, principal accounting officer, or any person performing similar
functions, the company intends to satisfy its disclosure obligations with respect
to any such waiver or amendment by posting such information on its internet
website set forth above rather than by filing a form8-k.
item11. executive
compensation
the executive
compensation section and the non-employee director compensation sections of
the companys proxy statement relating to its annual meeting of shareholders to
be held may1, 2007, are incorporated herein by reference.
item12. security
ownership of certain beneficial owners and management and related shareholder
matters
the share ownership
information section of the companys proxy statement relating to its annual
meeting of shareholders to be held may1, 2007, is incorporated herein by
reference.
equity compensation
plan information
the
following table sets forth information as of december31, 2006 regarding
the companys equity compensation plans. the only plan pursuant to which the
company may make equity grants is the st. paul travelers companies,inc.
2004 stock incentive plan (the 2004 incentive plan) that was approved by
shareholders at the companys 2004 annual meeting on july28, 2004. any
equity compensation plan of either spc or tpc that existed prior to the merger
had either terminated or otherwise could not be used for additional equity
grants after the 2004 incentive plan was approved. however, equity grants that
were outstanding under these plans were not affected by the plans terminations
or inability to issue additional equity grants. in addition, certain stock
options were granted previously under the st. paul companies,inc. amended
and restated 1994 stock incentive plan (the 1994 st. paul plan) and the
travelers property casualty corp. 2002 stock incentive plan (the travelers
stock plan) that allowed the option holder to use the reload method of option
exercise. these option holders may continue to use the reload exercise method,
and any reload options granted as a result will be issued under the 1994 st.
paul plan or travelers stock plan, respectively.
plancategory
numberof
securitiestobe
issueduponexercise
ofoutstanding
options,warrants
andrights
(a)
weightedaverage
exercisepriceof
outstandingoptions,
warrantsandrights
(b)
numberofsecurities
remainingavailablefor
futureissuanceunder
equitycompensation
plans(excluding
securitiesreflectedin
column(a))
(c)
equity
compensation plans approved by security holders(1)
38,495,880
$
42.86pershare
40,264,991
(3)
equity
compensation plans not approved bysecurity holders(2)
344,308
$
40.47 per share
total
38,840,188
$
42.84 per share
40,264,991
(3)
(1) in addition to the 2004
incentive plan, these numbers also include the 1994 st. paul plan, the st. paul
global stock option plan, certain plans for st. pauls united kingdom and
ireland employees, the travelers stock plan, and any other plan approved by the
respective shareholders of spc and tpc prior to the merger. the options granted
under the travelers stock plan were converted to stock options to purchase
company common stock in connection with the merger. the weighted average
exercise price in column (b)of the table reflects all such stock options.
shares of deferred stock or phantom stock units that may be settled in shares
of common stock are included in column (a)of the table, but are not included
in column (b)for purposes of the weighted average exercise price of stock
options.
(2) the st. paul
international 1988 stock option plan and the st. paul holdings 1996 stock
option plan were established to grant options to certain eligible employees of
spcs united kingdom operations. the options granted under these plans were
priced at the market price of the companys common stock on the date of grant
and were eligible for exercise at any time from three to ten years after the
date of grant. no additional options may be granted under these plans.
(3) these are shares
available for grant as of december31, 2006 under the 2004 incentive plan
pursuant to which the compensation committee of the board of directors may make
various stock-based
awards including grants of
stock options, restricted stock and stock appreciation rights. the 2004
incentive plan had 35 million shares initially authorized for issuance. in
addition to these 35 million shares, the following shares will become available
for grant under the 2004 incentive plan and, to the extent such shares have
become available as of december31, 2005, they are included in the table
as available for grant: (i)shares covered by outstanding awards under the
2004 incentive plan, the 1994 st. paul plan and the travelers stock plan that
are forfeited or otherwise terminated or settled in cash or other property
rather than settled through the issuance of shares; (ii)shares that are
used to pay the exercise price of stock options and shares used to pay withholding
taxes on equity awards generally; and (iii)shares purchased by the
company on the open market using cash from option exercises, as limited by the
2004 incentive plan.
except for shares
delivered to or retained in the travelers stock plan in connection with the
withholding of taxes applicable to the exercise of outstanding options that
have reload features, the provisions of the preceding paragraph that result in
shares becoming available for future grants under the 2004 incentive plan also
apply to any awards granted under the 1994 st. paul plan and the travelers
stock plan that were outstanding on the effective date of the 2004 incentive
plan.
in april1998, spc
merged with usf&g corporation (usf&g), and the outstanding options to
purchase usf&g stock were converted into options to purchase spcs common
stock. on december31, 2006, 140,220 shares were subject to outstanding
options pursuant to that conversion (with a weighted average exercise price of
$43.39) related to plans that had not been approved by usf&g shareholders
prior to the merger. no additional options could be granted under those plans
subsequent to the april1998 merger. these options are not included in the
preceding table.
item13. certain
relationships and related transactions
the transactions with
related persons and certain control persons section of the companys proxy
statement relating to its annual meeting of shareholders to be held may1,
2007, is incorporated herein by reference.
item14. principal
accounting fees and services
the audit and non-audit
fees section of the companys proxy statement relating to its annual meeting
of shareholders to be held may1, 2007, is incorporated herein by
reference.
partiv
item15. exhibits
and financial statement schedules
documents filed as a part of the report:
(1) financial statements. see
index to consolidated financial statements on page143 hereof.
(2) financial statement
schedules. see index to consolidated financial statements and schedules on page254
hereof.
(3) exhibits:
see exhibitindex on pages262-266 hereof.
signatures
pursuant
to the requirements of section13 or 15(d)of the securities exchange
act of 1934, the st.paul travelers companies,inc. has duly caused
this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly
authorized.
thest.paultravelerscompanies,inc.
(registrant)
date: february23, 2007
by
/s/bruce a. backberg
bruce
a. backberg
senior vice president
(authorized signatory)
pursuant to the
requirements of the securities exchange act of 1934, this report has been
signed below by the following persons on behalf of the st. paul travelers
companies,inc. and in the capacities and on the dates indicated.
date
by
/s/jay s. fishman
director, chairman, chief executive
february23, 2007
jay
s. fishman
officer and president (principal executive officer)
by
/s/jay s. benet
vice chairman and chief financial
february23, 2007
jay
s. benet
officer (principal financial officer)
by
/s/douglas k. russell
senior vice president, corporate
february23, 2007
douglas
k. russell
controller and treasurer (principal accounting
officer)
by
*
director
february23, 2007
john h.
dasburg
by
*
director
february23, 2007
leslie
b. disharoon
by
*
director
february23, 2007
janet
m. dolan
by
*
director
february23, 2007
kenneth
m. duberstein
by
*
director
february23, 2007
lawrence
g. graev
by
*
director
february23, 2007
thomas
r. hodgson
by
*
director
february23, 2007
robert
i. lipp
by
*
director
february23, 2007
blythe
j. mcgarvie
by
*
director
february23, 2007
glen d.
nelson, m.d.
by
*
director
february23, 2007
laurie
j. thomsen
*by
/s/bruce a. backberg
february23, 2007
bruce
a. backberg,
attorney-in-fact
index
to consolidated financial statements and schedules
page
report of independent registered public accounting
firm
consolidated statement of income for the years ended
december31, 2006, 2005 and 2004
consolidated balance sheet at december31, 2006
and 2005
consolidated statement of changes in shareholders
equity for the years ended december31, 2006, 2005 and 2004
consolidated statement of cash flows for the years
ended december31, 2006, 2005 and 2004
notes to consolidated financial statements
schedules:
schedule iicondensed
financial information of registrant (parent company only)
schedule
iiisupplementary insurance information
schedule
vvaluation and qualifying accounts
schedule visupplementary information concerning
property-casualty insurance operations
report of
independent registered public accounting firm
the board of directors and stockholders
the st. paul travelers companies,inc.:
under date of february23, 2007, we reported on
the consolidated balance sheet of the st. paul travelers companies,inc.
and subsidiaries as of december31, 2006 and 2005, and the related
consolidated statement of income, changes in shareholders equity, and cash
flows for each of the years in the three-year period ended december31,
2006, which are included in this form10-k. in connection with our
audits of the aforementioned consolidated financial statements, we also audited
the related financial statement schedules as listed in the accompanying index.
these financial statement schedules are the responsibility of the companys
management. our responsibility is to express an opinion on these financial
statement schedules based on our audits.
in our
opinion, such financial statement schedules, when considered in relation to the
basic consolidated financial statements taken as a whole, present fairly, in
all material respects, the information set forth therein.
/s/ kpmg llp
kpmg llp
minneapolis, minnesota
february23, 2007
schedule ii
the st. paul travelers companies, inc.
(parent company
only)
condensed financial information of registrant
(in millions)
condensed
statement of income (loss)
fortheperiodendeddecember31,*
revenues
net investment
income
$
$
$
net realized
investment gains (losses)
(24
)
(75
)
other revenues
total revenues
(66
)
expenses
interest
other
total expenses
loss
before income taxes and equity in net income of subsidiaries
(108
)
(143
)
(217
)
income tax
benefit
(37
)
(27
)
(72
)
loss
before equity in net income of subsidiaries
(71
)
(116
)
(145
)
equity in net
income of subsidiaries, net of minority interest
4,279
2,215
1,027
income
before discontinued operations
4,208
2,099
discontinued
operations
(477
)
net income
$
4,208
$
1,622
$
* data for 2006
and 2005 represents results of the st. paul travelers companies,inc. (parent
company only) for the years ended december31, 2006 and 2005. data for
2004 represents results of the st. paul travelers companies,inc. (parent
company only) for the nine-month period from the merger date of april1,
2004 through december31, 2004.
the condensed financial statements should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes thereto. 256
schedule ii
the st. paul
travelers companies, inc.
(parent
company only)
condensed financial
information of registrant
(in
millions)
condensed
balance sheet
atdecember31,
assets
fixed maturities
$
$
equity securities
short-term
securities
1,109
investment in
subsidiaries
26,946
23,708
other assets
total assets
$
28,823
$
26,046
liabilities
debt
$
3,338
$
3,272
other liabilities
total liabilities
3,688
3,743
shareholders
equity
preferred stock
savings planconvertible preferred stock (0.4 shares and 0.5 shares issued
and outstanding)
common stock
(1,750.0 shares authorized, 678.3 and 693.4 shares issued and outstanding)
18,530
18,096
retained earnings
7,253
3,750
accumulated other
changes in equity from nonowner sources
treasury stock,
at cost (25.2 and 1.2 shares)
(1,229
)
(47
)
total shareholders equity
25,135
22,303
total
liabilities and shareholders equity
$
28,823
$
26,046
the condensed financial statements should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes thereto. 257
schedule ii
the st. paul travelers companies, inc.
(parent company
only)
condensed financial information of registrant
(in millions)
condensed
statement of cash flows
fortheperiodendeddecember31,*
cash flows from operating
activities
net income
$
4,208
$
1,622
$
adjustments to reconcile
net income to net cash provided by operating activities:
equity in net income of subsidiaries
(4,279
)
(2,215
)
(1,027
)
loss from discontinued operations, net of tax
dividends received from consolidated subsidiaries
1,155
1,880
capital repaid from (contributed to) subsidiaries
(890
)
(940
)
deferred federal income tax expense
change in income taxes payable
(80
)
(234
)
(389
)
gain on redemption of subordinated debentures
(42
)
net transfer of pension asset and post-retirement
liability
(247
)
other
(61
)
net cash provided by operating activities
1,286
cash flows from investing activities
net sales
(purchases) of short-term securities
(982
)
(87
)
other
investments, net
(820
)
net cash provided by (used in) investing
activities
(1,802
)
(67
)
cash flows from financing
activities
issuance of debt
payment of debt
(652
)
(811
)
(173
)
dividends paid to
shareholders
(702
)
(628
)
(561
)
issuance of
common stock-maturity of equity unit forward contracts
treasury stock
acquiredshare repurchase program
(1,103
)
treasury stock
acquirednet employee share-based compensation
(17
)
(33
)
(1
)
issuance of
common stock-employee share options
other
(3
)
net cash used in financing activities
(1,437
)
(469
)
(346
)
net proceeds from
the sale of discontinued operations
1,994
net increase
(decrease) in cash
(16
)
cash at beginning
of period
cash at
end of period
$
$
$
supplemental disclosure of cash
flow information
cash received
during the year for taxes
$
$
$
cash paid during the
year for interest
$
$
$
* data for 2004
represents results of the st. paul travelers companies,inc. (parent
company only) for the nine-month period from the merger date of april1,
2004 through december31, 2004.
the condensed financial statements should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes thereto. 258
schedule
iii
the st. paul
travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries
supplementary insurance information
2004-2006
(in millions)
segment
deferred
policy
acquisition
costs
claimsand
claim
adjustment
expense
reserves
unearned
premiums
premium
revenue
net
investment
income(a)
claimsand
claim
adjustment
expenses
amortization
ofdeferred
acquisition
costs
other
operating
expenses(b)
premiums
written
business insurance
$
$
49,179
$
5,778
$
10,876
$
2,538
$
6,853
$
1,547
$
2,109
$
11,046
financial,
professional& international insurance
6,238
2,301
3,321
1,794
3,393
personal insurance
3,785
3,149
6,563
3,597
1,154
6,711
totalreportable
segments
1,615
59,202
11,228
20,760
3,515
12,244
3,339
3,449
21,150
other
consolidated
$
1,615
$
59,288
$
11,228
$
20,760
$
3,517
$
12,244
$
3,339
$
3,782
$
21,150
business insurance
$
$
51,238
$
5,774
$
11,116
$
2,341
$
9,358
$
1,570
$
2,040
$
10,999
financial,
professional& international insurance
5,465
2,173
3,197
1,818
3,159
personal insurance
4,304
2,980
6,028
3,751
1,048
6,228
totalreportable
segments
1,527
61,007
10,927
20,341
3,158
14,927
3,252
3,214
20,386
other
consolidated
$
1,527
$
61,090
$
10,927
$
20,341
$
3,165
$
14,927
$
3,252
$
3,515
$
20,386
business insurance
$
$
50,120
$
6,287
$
10,929
$
1,980
$
9,835
$
1,507
$
1,955
$
10,374
financial,
professional& international insurance
5,261
2,267
2,529
2,349
2,708
personal insurance
3,603
2,756
5,580
3,255
5,929
totalreportable
segments
1,559
58,984
11,310
19,038
2,657
15,439
2,978
2,896
19,011
other
consolidated
$
1,559
$
59,070
$
11,310
$
19,038
$
2,663
$
15,439
$
2,978
$
3,181
$
19,011
(a) beginning in the second quarter of 2004,
the company developed a methodology to allocate net investment income and
invested assets to the identified segments. see note 2 to the consolidated
financial statements for further discussion of this methodology.
(b) expense allocations are determined in
accordance with prescribed statutory accounting practices. these practices make
a reasonable allocation of all expenses to those product lines with which they
are associated.
schedulev
the st. paul travelers companies, inc. and
subsidiaries
valuation and qualifying accounts
(in
millions)
balance
atbeginning
ofperiod
charged
tocostsand
expenses(1)
charged
toother
accounts(2)
deductions(3)
balance
atendof
period
reinsurance
recoverables
$
$
$
$
$
allowance for
uncollectible:
agency loans
$
$
(3
)
$
$
$
premiums receivable from underwriting activities
$
$
$
$
$
deductibles
$
$
$
(3
)
$
$
reinsurance
recoverables
$
$
$
$
$
allowance for
uncollectible:
agency loans
$
$
$
$
$
premiums receivable from underwriting activities
$
$
$
(14
)
$
$
deductibles
$
$
(2
)
$
$
$
reinsurance
recoverables
$
$
$
$
(34
)
$
allowance for
uncollectible:
agency loans
$
$
$
$
$
premiums receivable from underwriting activities
$
$
$
$
$
deductibles
$
$
$
$
$
(1) includes balances
acquired in the merger and accounting conformity adjustments in 2004.
(2) charged to claims and
claim adjustment expenses in the consolidated statement of income (loss).
(3) credited to the related
asset account. amount in 2004 includes a $62 million addition related to the
commutation of certain reinsurance agreements, offset by $28 million of
deductions.
schedule vi
the st. paul
travelers companies, inc. and subsidiaries
supplementary
information concerning property-casualty insurance operations(1)
2004-2006
(in millions)
affiliation
deferred
policy
claimsand
discountfrom
net
claimsandclaim
adjustment
expensesincurred
relatedto:
amortization
ofdeferred
paidclaims
andclaim
with
registrant(2)
acquisition
costs
claimadjustment
expensereserves
reservesfor
unpaidclaims
unearned
premiums
earned
premiums
investment
income
current
year
prior
year
acquisition
costs
adjustment
expenses
premiums
written
$
1,615
$
59,202
$
1,069
$
11,228
$
20,760
$
3,517
$
12,533
$
(429
)
$
3,339
$
12,911
$
21,150
$
1,527
$
61,007
$
1,070
$
10,927
$
20,341
$
3,165
$
14,450
$
$
3,252
$
13,098
$
20,386
$
1,559
$
58,984
$
1,037
$
11,310
$
19,038
$
2,663
$
12,855
$
2,399
$
2,978
$
11,551
$
19,011
(1) excludes accident and health insurance business.
(2) consolidated property-casualty insurance operations.
exhibit index
exhibit
number
description of exhibit
3.1
amended and restated
articles of incorporation of the st. paul travelers companies,inc. (the
company), effective as of april1, 2004, were filed as
exhibit3.1 to the companys form8-k filed on april1,
2004, and are incorporated herein by reference.
3.2
amended and restated
bylaws of the company, effective as of february7, 2006, were filed as
exhibit3.2 to the companys form8-k filed on
february10, 2006, and are incorporated herein by reference.
10.1
trademark license
agreement dated as of august19, 2002, by and between travelers property
casualty corp. (tpc) and the travelers insurance company, was filed as
exhibit10.2 to tpcs quarterly report on form10-q for the
fiscal quarter ended september30, 2002, and is incorporated herein by
reference.
10.2
revolving credit
agreement, dated june10, 2005, between the company and a syndicate of
financial institutions, was filed as exhibit10.1 to the companys form10-q
for the fiscal quarter ended june30, 2005, and is incorporated herein
by reference.
10.3
repurchase agreement,
dated march29, 2005, between the company and nuveen
investments,inc. was filed as exhibit10.1 to the companys
form8-k filed on april1, 2005, and is incorporated herein
by reference.
10.4
separation agreement,
dated april1, 2005, between the company and nuveen
investments,inc. was filed as exhibit10.2 to the companys
form8-k filed on april1, 2005, and is incorporated herein
by reference.
10.5
forward sale agreement,
dated april6, 2005, among the company, merrill lynch international and
merrill lynch, pierce, fenner& smith, as agent and collateral
agent, was filed as exhibit10.2 to the companys form8-k
filed on april12, 2005, and is incorporated herein by reference.
10.6
forward sale agreement,
dated april6, 2005, among the company, morgan stanley& co.
international limited and morgan stanley& co. incorporated, as
agent and collateral agent, was filed as exhibit10.3 to the companys
form8-k filed on april12, 2005, and is incorporated herein
by reference.
10.7
indemnity agreement,
dated april6, 2005, among the company, nuveen investments,inc.,
merrill lynch& co.,inc., merrill lynch, pierce,
fenner& smith incorporated, morgan stanley& co.
incorporated and merrill lynch international limited was filed as
exhibit10.4 to the companys form8-k filed on
april12, 2005, and is incorporated herein by reference.
10.8
indemnity agreement,
dated april6, 2005, among the company, nuveen investments,inc.,
morgan stanley, morgan stanley& co. incorporated, merrill lynch,
pierce, fenner& smith incorporated and morgan stanley&
co. international limited was filed as exhibit10.5 to the companys
form8-k filed on april12, 2005, and is incorporated herein
by reference.
10.9
*
employment agreement
between the company and jay s. fishman was filed as exhibit10.1 to the
companys quarterly report on form10-q for the fiscal quarter
ended june30, 2004, and is incorporated herein by reference.
10.10
*
amendment to employment
agreement between the company and jay s. fishman was filed as
exhibit10.1 to the companys quarterly report on form10-q
for the fiscal quarter ended september30, 2004, and is incorporated
herein by reference.
10.11
*
amendment to employment
agreement between the company and jay s. fishman as of december13, 2006
is filed herewith.
10.12
*
amended and restated
executive employment agreement between tpc and robert i. lipp, dated as of
november16, 2003 was filed as exhibit10.22 to tpcs annual report
on form10-k for the fiscal year ended december31, 2003, and
is incorporated herein by reference.
10.13
*
assignment and
assumption agreement dated as of april1, 2004 by and between tpc, as
the assignor, and the company, as assignee, relating to the amended and
restated executive employment agreement between tpc and robert i. lipp was
filed as exhibit10.15 to the companys quarterly report on form10-q
for the fiscal quarter ended march31, 2004, and is incorporated herein
by reference.
10.14
*
letter agreement between
william h. heyman and the company, dated april27, 2005, was filed as
exhibit10.3 to the companys quarterly report on form10-q
for the fiscal quarter ended march31, 2005, and is incorporated herein
by reference.
10.15
*
letter agreement between
william h. heyman and the company, dated april27, 2005, was filed as
exhibit10.4 to the companys quarterly report on form10-q
for the fiscal quarter ended march31, 2005, and is incorporated herein
by reference.
10.16
*
the st. paul travelers
companies,inc. 2004 stock incentive plan was filed as exhibit10.2
to the companys quarterly report on form10-q for the fiscal
quarter ended june30, 2005, and is incorporated herein by reference.
10.17
*
the st. paul travelers
companies,inc. senior executive performance plan was filed as
exhibit10.1 to the companys quarterly report on form10-q
for the fiscal quarter ended march31, 2005, and is incorporated herein
by reference.
10.18
*
the st. paul travelers
companies,inc. amended and restated deferred compensation plan for
non-employee directors was filed as exhibit99.2 of the companys
registration statement on forms-8 (registration no.333-120998)
dated december3, 2004, and is incorporated herein by reference.
10.19
*
formof stock
option grant notification and agreement was filed as exhibit10.18 to
the companys form10-k for the fiscal year ended
december31, 2005, and is incorporated herein by reference.
10.20
*
formof restricted
stock award notification and agreement was filed as exhibit10.19 to the
companys form10-k for the fiscal year ended december31,
2005, and is incorporated herein by reference.
10.21
*
formof performance
share award notification and agreement was filed as exhibit10.20 to the
companys form10-k for the fiscal year ended december31,
2005, and is incorporated herein by reference.
10.22
*
formof executive
officer capital accumulation program restricted stock award notification and
agreement was filed as exhibit10.2 to the companys quarterly report on
form10-q for the fiscal quarter ended march31, 2005, and is
incorporated herein by reference.
10.23
*
non-employee director
annual equity grant notification and agreement was filed as exhibit10.1
to the companys form8-k filed on may9, 2005, and is
incorporated herein by reference.
10.24
*
the st. paul
companies,inc. (spc) deferred stock plan for non-employee directors
was filed as exhibit10(a)to the companys form10-k
for the fiscal year ended december31, 2000, and is incorporated herein
by reference.
10.25
*
the spc amended and
restated 1994 stock incentive plan was filed as exhibit10(f)to
the companys form10-k for the fiscal year ended
december31, 2001, and is incorporated herein by reference.
10.26
*
the spc directors
charitable award program, as amended, was filed as exhibit10(d)to
the companys form10-k for the fiscal year ended
december31, 2000, and is incorporated herein by reference.
10.27
*
the spc amended and
restated special severance policy was filed as exhibit10(e)to the
companys form10-k for the fiscal year ended december31,
1998, and is incorporated herein by reference.
10.28
*
the amendment to the spc
amended and restated special severance policy was filed as
exhibit10(e)to the companys form10-k for the fiscal
year ended december31, 2000, and is incorporated herein by reference.
10.29
*
the spc annual incentive
plan was filed as an exhibit to the spc proxy statement relating to the spc
1999 annual meeting of shareholders that was held on may4, 1999 and is
incorporated herein by reference.
10.30
*
the spc deferred
management incentive awards plan was filed as exhibit10(a)to the
companys form10-k for the fiscal year ended december31,
1997, and is incorporated herein by reference.
10.31
*
the spc directors
deferred compensation plan was filed as exhibit10(b)to the
companys form10-k for the fiscal year ended december31,
1997, and is incorporated herein by reference.
10.32
*
the spc benefit equalization
plan2001 revision and the first and second amendments thereto were filed as
exhibit10.27 to the companys form10-k for the fiscal year
ended december31, 2004, and are incorporated herein by reference.
10.33
*
tpc compensation plan
for non-employee directors as amended on january22, 2004 was filed as
exhibit10.16 to tpcs annual report on form10-k for the
fiscal year ended december31, 2003, and is incorporated herein by
reference.
10.34
*
tpc 2002 stock incentive
plan, as amended effective january23, 2003, was filed as
exhibit10.22 to tpcs annual report on form10-k for the
fiscal year ended december31, 2002, and is incorporated herein by
reference.
10.35
*
tpc deferred
compensation plan was filed as exhibit10.23 to tpcs annual report on
form10-k for the fiscal year ended december31, 2002, and is
incorporated herein by reference.
10.36
*
tpc benefit equalization
plan was filed as exhibit10.24 to tpcs annual report on form10-k
for the fiscal year ended december31, 2002, and is incorporated herein
by reference.
10.37
*
the st. paul travelers
companies,inc. deferred compensation plan effective december1,
2004 was filed as exhibit99.1 to the companys registration statement
on forms-8 (registration no.333-120998) dated
december3, 2004, and is incorporated herein by reference.
10.38
*
the companys senior
executive performance plan was filed as exhibit10.1 to the companys
quarterly report on form10-q for the fiscal quarter ended
march31, 2005, and is incorporated herein by reference.
10.39
amended and restated tax
allocation agreement, dated as of march27, 2002, between tpc and
citigroup inc., was filed as exhibit10.2 to tpcs quarterly report on
form10-q for the fiscal quarter ended march31, 2002, and is
incorporated herein by reference.
10.40
*
the st. paul travelers
companies,inc. severance plan was filed as exhibit10.39 to the
companys form10-k for the fiscal year ended december31,
2005, and is incorporated herein by reference.
10.41
*
formof
non-solicitation and non-disclosure agreement, amending the st. paul
travelers companies,inc. severance plan, was filed as exhibit99
to the companys form8-k filed on february16, 2006, and is
incorporated herein by reference.
10.42
*
assurance of
discontinuance with the office of the attorney general of the state of new
york, the office of the attorney general of the state of illinois and the
office of the attorney general of the state of connecticut was filed as
exhibit10.1 to the companys form10-q for the fiscal
quarter ended june30, 2006, and is incorporated herein by reference.
10.43
*
stipulation with the new
york state department of insurance was filed as exhibit10.2 to the
companys form10-q for the fiscal quarter ended june30,
2006, and is incorporated herein by reference.
12.1
statement regarding the
computation of the ratio of earnings to fixed charges and the ratio of
earnings to combined fixed charges and preferred stock dividends is filed
herewith.
21.1
subsidiaries of the
company is filed herewith.
23.1
consent of kpmg llp,
independent registered public accounting firm, with respect to the
incorporation by reference of kpmg llps audit report into registration
statements on forms s-8 of the company (sec file no.33-24575,
no.33-49273, no.33-56987, no.333-01065,
no.333-22329, no.333-25203, no.333-28915,
no.333-50941, no.333-50943, no.333-67983,
no.333-63114, no.333-63118, no.333-65726,
no.333-65728, no.333-84740, no.333-107698,
no.333-107699, no.333-114135, no.333-117726,
no.333-120998 and no.333-128026) and forms s-3
(sec file no.333-92466, no.333-92466-01,
no.333-98525, no.333-98525-01 and no.333-130323)
is filed herewith.
24.1
power of attorney is
filed herewith.
31.1
certification of jay s.
fishman, chairman and chief executive officer of the company, as required by
section302 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002 is filed herewith.
31.2
certification of jay s.
benet, vice chairman and chief financial officer of the company, as required
by section302 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002 is filed herewith.
32.1
certification of jay s.
fishman, chairman and chief executive officer of the company, as required by
section906 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002 is filed herewith.
32.2
certification of jay s.
benet, vice chairman and chief financial officer of the company, as required
by section906 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002 is filed herewith.
the total amount of securities authorized pursuant to
any instrument defining rights of holders of long-term debt of the company does
not exceed 10% of the total assets of the company and its consolidated
subsidiaries. therefore, the company is not filing any instruments evidencing
long-term debt. however, the company will furnish copies of any such instrument
to the securities and exchange commission upon request.
copies of any of the exhibits referred to above will
be furnished to security holders who make written request therefor to the st.
paul travelers companies,inc., 385 washington street, saint paul, mn,
55102, attention: corporate secretary.
filed
herewith.
* management
contract or compensatory plan in which directors and/or executive officers are
eligible to participate.
