10-k
a2190694z10-k.htm
10-k
use these links to rapidly review the document
table of contents
item 8. financial statements and supplementary data
index to consolidated financial statements and schedules
table of contents
united states securities and exchange commission washington, d.c. 20549
form 10-k
annual report pursuant to section13 or 15(d)
of the securities exchange act of1934
for the fiscal year ended december31, 2008
or
o
transition report pursuant to section13 or 15(d)
of the securities exchange act of1934
for the transition period
fromto
commission file number001-10898
the travelers companies,inc. (exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
minnesota
41-0518860
(state or other jurisdiction of
incorporation or organization)
(i.r.s. employer
identification no.)
485 lexington avenue,
new york, ny 10017 (address of principal executive offices) (zip code)
(917)778-6000
(registrant's telephone number, including area code)
securities registered pursuant to section12(b) of the act:
title of each class
name of each exchange on which registered
common stock, without par value
new york stock exchange
securities registered pursuant to section12(g) of the act:none
indicate by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer (as defined in rule405 of the securities
act).yesnoo
indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to section13 or section15(d) of the
act.yesono
indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1)has filed all reports required to be filed by section13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934 during
the preceding 12months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2)has been subject to such filing requirements for the past
90days.yesnoo
indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to item405 of regulations-k is not contained herein, and will not be contained,
to the best of registrant's knowledge, in definitive proxy or information statements incorporated by reference in partiii of this form10-k or any amendment to this
form10-k.
indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer or a smaller reporting company. see
definitions of "large accelerated filer," "accelerated filer" and "smaller reporting company" in rule12b-2 of the act:
large accelerated filer
accelerated filero
non-accelerated filero
(do not check if a smaller reporting company)
smaller reporting companyo
indicate
by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in rule12b-2 of the
act).yesono
as of june30, 2008, the aggregate market value of the registrant's voting and non-voting common equity held by non-affiliates was
$25,642,673,490.
as
of february13, 2009, 584,873,079 shares of the registrant's common stock (without par value) were outstanding.
documents incorporated by reference
portions of the registrant's proxy statement relating to the 2009 annual meeting of shareholders are incorporated by reference into partiii of this report.
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc.
annual report on form10-k
for fiscal year ended december31, 2008
table of contents
item number
page
parti
1.
business
1a.
risk factors
1b.
unresolved staff comments
2.
properties
3.
legal proceedings
4.
submission of matters to a vote of security holders
partii
5.
market for registrant's common equity, related shareholder matters and issuer
purchases of equity securities
6.
selected financial data
7.
management's discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of
operations
7a.
quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk
8.
financial statements and supplementary data
9.
changes in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and financial
disclosure
9a.
controls and procedures
9b.
other information
partiii
10.
directors, executive officers and corporate governance
11.
executive compensation
12.
security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management and related
shareholder matters
13.
certain relationships and related transactions, and director
independence
14.
principal accountant fees and services
partiv
15.
exhibits and financial statement schedules
signatures
index to consolidated financial statements and schedules
exhibit index
table of contents
part i
item1.business
the travelers companies,inc. (together with its consolidated subsidiaries, the company) is a holding company principally
engaged, through its subsidiaries, in providing a wide range of commercial and personal property and casualty insurance products and services to businesses, government units, associations and
individuals. the company, known as the st.paul companies,inc. (spc) prior to its merger with travelers property casualty corp. (tpc) in 2004, is incorporated as a general business
corporation under the laws of the state of minnesota and is one of the oldest insurance organizations in the united states, dating back to 1853. the principal executive offices of the company are
located at 485 lexington avenue, new york, new york 10017, and the telephone
number is (917)778-6000. the company also maintains executive offices in hartford, connecticut, and st.paul, minnesota. the term "trv" in this document refers to the
travelers companies,inc., the parent holding company excluding subsidiaries.
on
april1, 2004, tpc merged with a subsidiary of spc, as a result of which tpc became a wholly-owned subsidiary of spc, and spc changed its name to the st.paul travelers
companies,inc. for accounting purposes, this transaction was accounted for as a reverse acquisition with tpc treated as the accounting acquirer. accordingly, this transaction was accounted for
as a purchase business combination, using tpc's historical financial information and applying fair value estimates to the acquired assets, liabilities and commitments of spc as of april1,
2004. beginning on april1, 2004, the results of operations and financial position of spc were consolidated with tpc's results of operations and financial position.
on
february26, 2007, the st.paul travelers companies,inc. changed its name to the travelers companies,inc. and began trading on the new york stock
exchange under the new stock symbol "trv."
for
a summary of the company's revenues, operating income and total assets by reportable business segments, see note2 of notes to the company's consolidated financial statements.
property and casualty insurance operations
the property and casualty insurance industry is highly competitive in the areas of price, service, product offerings, agent
relationships and method of distribution, i.e.,use of independent agents, exclusive agents, direct marketing (including use of toll-free numbers and the internet) and/or salaried
employees. according toa.m. best, there are approximately 960 property casualty organizations in the united states, comprising approximately 2,300 property and casualty companies. of those
organizations, the top 150 accounted for approximately 92% of the consolidated industry's total net written premiums in 2007. the company competes with both foreign and domestic insurers. in addition,
several property and casualty insurers writing commercial lines of business, including the company, offer products for alternative forms of risk protection in addition to traditional insurance
products. these products include large deductible programs and various forms of self-insurance that utilize captive insurance companies and risk retention groups. the company's competitive
position in the marketplace is based on many factors, including the following:
premiums charged;
contract terms and conditions;
products and services offered;
claim service;
agent, broker and client relationships;
table of contents
local presence;
geographic scope of business;
overall financial strength;
ratings assigned by independent rating agencies;
experience and qualifications of employees; and
technology and information systems.
in
addition, the marketplace is affected by available capacity of the insurance industry, as measured by policyholders' surplus, and the availability of reinsurance. industry capacity as
measured by surplus expands and contracts primarily in conjunction with profit levels generated by the industry. capital raised by debt and equity offerings may also increase a company's surplus.
geographic distribution
the following table shows the geographic distribution of the company's consolidated direct written premiums for the year ended
december31, 2008:
state
% of
total
new york
9.7
%
california
9.0
texas
7.5
pennsylvania
4.9
florida
4.4
new jersey
4.0
massachusetts
3.9
illinois
3.6
georgia
3.2
all other domestic(1)
43.4
total domestic
93.6
international
6.4
consolidated total
100.0
%
(1)no
other single state accounted for 3.0% or more of the total direct written premiums written in 2008 by the company's domestic operations.
the
company is organized into three reportable business segments: business insurance; financial, professional& international insurance; and personal insurance.
business insurance
the business insurance segment offers a broad array of property and casualty insurance and insurance-related services to its clients
primarily in the united states. business insurance is organized into the following six groups, which collectively comprise business insurance core operations:
select accounts serves small businesses for property and casualty
products, including commercial multi-peril, property, general liability, commercial auto and workers' compensation insurance.
table of contents
commercial accounts serves mid-sized businesses for property
and casualty products, including property, general liability, commercial multi-peril, commercial auto and workers' compensation insurance.
national accounts comprises three business units. the largest provides
casualty products and services to large companies, with particular emphasis on workers' compensation, general liability and automobile liability, generally utilizing loss-sensitive
products such as collateralized deductibles or self-insured programs. national accounts also includes discover re, which provides property and casualty insurance products on an unbundled
basis using third-party administrators for insureds who utilize programs such as collateralized deductibles, captive reinsurers and self-insurance. in addition, national accounts includes
the commercial residual market business, which primarily offers workers' compensation products and services to the involuntary market.
industry-focused underwriting.the following units serve
targeted industries with differentiated combinations of insurance coverage, risk management, claims handling and other services:
construction serves a broad range of construction businesses, offering
guaranteed cost products for small to mid-sized policyholders and loss sensitive programs for larger accounts. for the larger accounts, the customer and the company work together in
actively managing and controlling exposure and claims and they share risk through policy features such as deductibles or retrospective rating. products offered include workers' compensation, general
liability, umbrella, commercial auto, property and inland marine coverages, and other risk management solutions.
technology serves small to large companies involved in telecommunications,
information technology, medical technology and electronics manufacturing, offering a comprehensive portfolio of products and services. these products include property, commercial auto, general
liability, workers' compensation, umbrella, internet liability, technology errors and omissions coverages and global companion products.
public sector services markets insurance products and services to public
entities including municipalities, counties, indian nation gaming and selected special government districts such as water and sewer utilities. the policies written by this unit typically cover
property, commercial auto, general liability and errors and omissions exposures.
oil& gas provides specialized property and liability products and
services for customers involved in the exploration and production of oil and natural gas, including operators and drilling contractors, as well as various service and supply companies and
manufacturers that support upstream operations. the policies written by this business group cover risks including physical damage, liability and business interruption.
agribusiness serves small to medium-sized agricultural businesses,
including farms, ranches, wineries and related operations, offering property and liability coverages other than workers' compensation.
target risk underwriting.the following units serve
commercial businesses requiring specialized product underwriting, claims handling and risk management services:
national property provides traditional and customized property insurance
programs to large and mid-sized customers, including office building owners, manufacturers, municipalities and schools, retailers, and service businesses. these insurance programs cover
losses on buildings, business assets, personal property and business interruption exposures.
inland marine provides insurance for goods in transit and movable objects
for customers such as jewelers, museums, contractors and the transportation industry. builders' risk
table of contents
insurance
is also offered to customers during the construction, renovation or repair of buildings and other structures.
ocean marine serves the marine transportation industry and related
services, as well as other businesses involved in international trade. the company's product offerings in this unit fall under six main coverage categories: marine liability, cargo, hull and
machinery, protection and indemnity, pleasure craft, and marine property and liability.
excess casualty serves small to mid-sized commercial
businesses, offering mono-line umbrella and excess coverage where the company typically does not write the primary casualty coverage, or where other business units within the company
prefer to access the underwriting expertise and/or limit capacity of the excess casualty business unit.
boiler& machinery serves small to large companies, offering
comprehensive breakdown coverages for equipment, including property and business interruption coverages. through the boilerre unit, boiler& machinery also serves other property casualty
carriers that do not have in-house expertise with reinsurance, underwriting, engineering, claim handling and risk management services for this type of coverage.
global accounts provides insurance to u.s. companies with foreign property
and liability exposures (home-foreign), and foreign organizations with property and liability exposures located in the united states (reverse-flow), as part of a global
program.
specialized distribution.the following units market and
underwrite their products to customers predominantly through licensed wholesale, general and program agents that manage customers' unique insurance requirements:
northland provides insurance coverage for the commercial transportation
industry, as well as commercial liability and package policies for small, difficult to place specialty classes of commercial business on an admitted or excess and surplus lines basis.
national programs offers tailored property and casualty programs on an
admitted basis for customers with common risk characteristics or coverage requirements. programs available include those for entertainment, architects and engineers, equipment rental and golf
services.
business
insurance also includes the special liability group (which manages the company's asbestos and environmental liabilities); the assumed reinsurance, health care, and certain
international and other runoff operations; and policies written by the company's gulf operation (gulf), which is in runoff. these are collectively referred to as business insurance other. in december
2008, the company completed the sale of unionamerica holdings limited (unionamerica), which comprised its united kingdom-based runoff insurance and reinsurance businesses. the sale was not material to
the company's results of operations or financial position.
table of contents
selected market and product information
the following table sets forth business insurance net written premiums by market and product line for the periods indicated. for a
description of the markets and product lines referred to in the table, see "principal markets and methods of distribution" and "product lines," respectively.
(for the year ended december31, in millions)
% of total
by market:
select accounts
$
2,756
$
2,711
$
2,663
24.6
%
commercial accounts
2,524
2,518
2,376
22.4
national accounts
1,056
1,135
8.9
industry-focused underwriting
2,396
2,301
2,196
21.4
target risk underwriting
1,593
1,665
1,629
14.2
specialized distribution
1,015
1,022
8.4
total business insurance core
11,204
11,266
11,021
99.9
business insurance other
0.1
total business insurance by market
$
11,220
$
11,318
$
11,046
100.0
%
by product line:
commercial multi-peril
$
2,938
$
3,066
$
3,083
26.2
%
workers' compensation
2,452
2,267
2,135
21.9
commercial automobile
1,952
2,011
2,013
17.4
property
1,860
1,990
1,939
16.6
general liability
2,011
1,943
1,857
17.9
other
total business insurance by product line
$
11,220
$
11,318
$
11,046
100.0
%
principal markets and methods of distribution
business insurance distributes its products through approximately 8,500 independent agencies and brokers located throughout the united
states that are serviced by approximately 100 field offices and three customer service centers. business insurance continues to make significant investments in enhanced technology utilizing
internet-based applications to provide real-time interface capabilities with independent agencies and brokers. business insurance builds relationships with well-established,
independent insurance agencies and brokers. in selecting new independent agencies and brokers to distribute its products, business insurance considers, among other attributes, each agency's or
broker's financial strength, staff experience and strategic fit with its operating and marketing plans. once an agency or broker is appointed, business insurance carefully monitors its performance.
select accounts is a leading provider of property and casualty insurance products to small businesses. it serves firms with generally
fewer than 50 employees. products offered by select accounts are guaranteed cost policies, including packaged products covering property and liability exposures. products are sold through independent
agents and brokers, who are often the same agents and brokers that sell the company's commercial accounts and personal insurance products.
select
accounts offers its independent agents a system for small businesses that helps them connect all aspects of sales and service through a comprehensive service platform. components
of the platform include agency automation capabilities and service centers that function as an extension of an agency's customer service operations, both of which are highly utilized by agencies.
agencies accounting for approximately 43% of this group's net written premium have chosen to take advantage of select accounts' service centers, which offer agencies a wide range of services,
including coverage and billing
table of contents
inquiries,
policy changes, the assistance of licensed service professionals and extended hours of operations.
commercial accounts sells a broad range of property and casualty insurance products through a large network of independent agents and
brokers. commercial accounts primarily targets mid-sized businesses with 50 to 1,000 employees. the company offers a full line of products to its commercial accounts customers with an
emphasis on guaranteed cost programs. each account is underwritten based on the unique risk characteristics, loss history and coverage needs of the account. the ability to underwrite at this detailed
level allows commercial accounts to have a broad risk appetite and a diversified customer base.
national accounts is comprised of three business units. the largest unit sells a variety of casualty products and services to large
companies. national accounts clients for the most part select loss-sensitive products in connection with a large deductible or self-insured program and, to a much lesser
extent, a retrospectively rated or a guaranteed cost insurance policy. through a network of field offices, the company's underwriting specialists work closely with national and regional brokers to
tailor insurance programs to meet clients' needs. workers' compensation accounted for approximately 76% of sales to national accounts customers during 2008, based on direct written premiums and fees.
national accounts generated $225million of fee income in 2008, excluding commercial residual market business discussed below.
national
accounts includes the company's discover re operation, which principally provides commercial auto liability, general liability, workers' compensation and property coverages. it
serves retail brokers and insureds who utilize programs such as collateralized deductibles, captive reinsurers and self-insurance.
in
addition, national accounts includes the company's commercial residual market business. the company's commercial residual market business sells claims and policy management services
to workers' compensation pools throughout the united states. the company services approximately 33% of the total workers' compensation assigned risk market. the company is one of very few servicing
carriers that operate nationally. assigned risk plan contracts generated $110million in fee income in 2008.
many
national accounts customers require insurance-related services in addition to or in lieu of pure risk coverage, primarily for workers' compensation and, to a lesser extent, general
liability and commercial automobile exposures. these types of services include risk management services, such as claims administration, loss control and risk management information services, and are
generally offered in connection with large deductible or self-insured programs. these services generate fee income rather than net written premiums.
industry-focused underwriting markets a wide array of property and casualty products and services tailored to targeted industry segments.
unique marketing and underwriting groups are focused on individual industry segments of significant size and complexity that require unique underwriting, claim, risk management or other
insurance-related products and services. the following industry-focused units, which are described in more detail earlier in this report, have been established: construction, technology, public sector
services, oil& gas, and agribusiness.
products
are distributed primarily through the same agents and brokers servicing select accounts and commercial accounts, although there may be more business written with agents that
also specialize in servicing the needs of certain of these industries.
target risk underwriting services a wide customer base with unique and specialized insurance products and services. these specialized
units have expertise in meeting customers' specialized property and casualty coverage requirements. these units include national property, inland marine, ocean
table of contents
marine,
excess casualty, boiler& machinery, and global accounts, which are described in more detail earlier in this report.
products
are distributed primarily through the same agents and brokers servicing select accounts and commercial accounts, as well as specialized agents and brokers with expertise in
certain of these products.
specialized distribution distributes admitted and excess and surplus lines property and casualty products predominantly through selected
wholesale agents, both on a brokerage and managing general underwriting basis, and through selected program agents. brokers, general agents and program agents operate in certain markets that are not
typically served by the company's appointed retail agents, or they maintain certain affinity arrangements in specialized market segments. the wholesale excess and surplus lines market, which is
characterized by the absence of rate and form regulation, allows for more flexibility to write certain classes of business. in working with wholesale or program agents on a brokerage basis,
specialized distribution underwrites the business and sets the premium level. in working with wholesale or program agents on a managing general underwriting or program manager basis, the agents
produce and underwrite business that conforms to underwriting guidelines that have been specifically designed for each facility or program.
pricing and underwriting
pricing of business insurance property and casualty insurance products is generally developed based upon an estimation of expected
losses, the expenses of producing, issuing and servicing business and managing claims, the time value of money associated with such loss and expense cash flows, and a reasonable allowance for profit.
the company has a disciplined approach to underwriting and risk management that emphasizes profitable growth rather than premium volume or market share.
business
insurance has developed an underwriting and pricing methodology that incorporates underwriting, claims, engineering, actuarial and product development disciplines for particular
industries. this approach is designed to maintain high quality underwriting and pricing discipline. it utilizes proprietary data gathered and analyzed with respect to its business insurance business
over many years. the underwriters and engineers use this information to assess and evaluate risks prior to quotation. this information provides specialized knowledge about specific industry segments.
this
methodology enables business insurance to streamline its risk selection process and develop pricing parameters that will not compromise its underwriting integrity.
for
smaller businesses, select accounts uses a process based on industry classifications to allow agents and field underwriting representatives to make underwriting and pricing decisions
within predetermined classifications, because underwriting criteria and pricing tend to be more standardized for these smaller exposures.
a
portion of business in this segment, particularly in national accounts and construction, is written with large deductible insurance policies. under workers' compensation insurance
contracts with deductible features, the company is obligated to pay the claimant the full amount of the claim. the company is subsequently reimbursed by the contractholder for the deductible amount
and is subject to credit risk until such reimbursement is made. at december31, 2008, contractholder receivables and payables on unpaid losses associated with large deductible policies were
each approximately $6.34billion. retrospectively rated policies are also used for workers' compensation coverage. although the retrospectively rated feature of the policy substantially reduces
insurance risk for the company, it introduces additional credit risk to the company. premium receivables from holders of retrospectively rated policies totaled approximately $322million at
december31, 2008. significant collateral, primarily letters of credit and, to a lesser extent, cash collateral, trusts or surety bonds, is generally requested for large deductible plans and/or
retrospectively rated policies that provide for deferred collection of deductible recoveries and/or ultimate premiums. the amount of collateral requested is predicated upon
table of contents
the
creditworthiness of the customer and the nature of the insured risks. business insurance continually monitors the credit exposure on individual accounts and the adequacy of collateral.
the
company continually monitors its exposure to natural and man-made peril catastrophic losses and attempts to manage such exposure. in order to manage the company's
exposure to catastrophe losses, business insurance limits the writing of new property business and selectively takes underwriting action on existing business in some markets. in addition, the company
has tightened underwriting standards, implemented price increases in some catastrophe-prone areas and put in place deductibles specific to hurricane-, wind- and hail-prone
areas. the company uses various analyses and methods, including sophisticated computer modeling techniques, to analyze underwriting risks of business in hurricane-prone, earthquake-prone and target
risk areas for terrorism. the company relies, in part, upon this analysis to make underwriting decisions designed to manage its exposure on catastrophe-exposed business. see
"item7management's discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operationscatastrophe modeling." the company also utilizes reinsurance to manage its
aggregate exposures to catastrophes. see "reinsurance."
product lines
commercial multi-peril provides a combination of property and liability coverage.
property insurance covers damages such as those caused by fire, wind, hail, earthquake, water, theft, vandalism and terrorism, and protects businesses from financial loss due to business interruption
resulting from a covered loss. liability coverage insures businesses against third party claims arising from accidents occurring on their premises or arising out of their operations, such as injuries
sustained from products sold.
workers' compensation provides coverage for employers for specified benefits payable under state or federal law for workplace injuries to
employees. there are typically four types of benefits payable under workers' compensation policies: medical benefits, disability benefits, death benefits and vocational rehabilitation benefits. the
company emphasizes managed care cost containment strategies, which involve employers, employees and care providers in a cooperative effort that focuses on the injured employee's early return to work
and cost-effective quality care. the company offers the following types of workers' compensation products:
guaranteed cost insurance products, in which policy premium charges are fixed for the period of coverage and do not vary
as a result of the insured's loss experience;
loss-sensitive insurance products, including large deductible and retrospectively rated policies, in which
fees or premiums are adjusted based on actual loss experience of the insured during the policy period;
service programs, which are generally sold to the company's national accounts customers, where the company receives fees
rather than premiums for providing loss prevention, risk management, and claim and benefit administration services to organizations under service agreements.
the
company also participates in state assigned risk pools as a servicing carrier and pool participant.
commercial automobile provides coverage for businesses against losses incurred from personal bodily injury, bodily injury to third
parties, property damage to an insured's vehicle and property damage to
other vehicles and other property resulting from the ownership, maintenance or use of automobiles and trucks in a business.
property provides coverage for loss of or damage to buildings, inventory and equipment from natural disasters, including hurricanes,
windstorms, earthquakes, hail, and severe winter weather. also
table of contents
covered
are manmade events such as theft, vandalism, fires, explosions, terrorism and financial loss due to business interruption resulting from covered property damage. for additional information on
terrorism coverages, see "reinsurancecatastrophe reinsuranceterrorism risk insurance acts." property also includes specialized equipment insurance, which provides coverage
for loss or damage resulting from the mechanical breakdown of boilers and machinery, and ocean and inland marine, which provides coverage for goods in transit and unique,
one-of-a-kind exposures.
general liability provides coverage for liability exposures including bodily injury and property damage arising from products sold and
general business operations. specialized liability policies may also include coverage for directors' and officers' liability arising in their official capacities, employment practices liability
insurance, fiduciary liability for trustees and sponsors of pension, health and welfare, and other employee benefit plans, errors and omissions insurance for employees, agents, professionals and
others arising from acts or failures to act under specified circumstances, as well as umbrella and excess insurance. errors and omissions insurance for professionals (such as lawyers, accountants,
doctors and other health care providers) is sometimes also known as professional liability insurance.
net retention policy
the following discussion reflects the company's retention policy with respect to the business insurance segment as of january1,
2009. for third party liability, business insurance generally limits its net retention, through the use of reinsurance, to a maximum of $18.8million per insured, per occurrence after retaining
a layer of expected losses. the net retained amount per risk for property exposures is generally limited to $15.0million, after reinsurance. the company generally retains its workers'
compensation exposures. reinsurance treaties often have aggregate limits or caps which may result in larger net per risk retentions if the aggregate limits or caps are reached. the company utilizes
facultative reinsurance to provide additional limits capacity or to reduce retentions on an individual risk basis. the company may also retain amounts greater than those described herein based upon
the individual characteristics of the risk.
geographic distribution
the following table shows the geographic distribution of business insurance's direct written premiums for the states that accounted for
the majority of premium volume for the year ended december31, 2008:
state
% of
total
california
12.3
%
new york
7.8
texas
7.5
florida
4.8
illinois
4.5
pennsylvania
4.2
new jersey
3.8
massachusetts
3.7
all others(1)
51.4
total
100.0
%
(1)no
other single state accounted for 3.0% or more of the total direct written premiums written in 2008 by the business insurance segment.
table of contents
competition
the insurance industry is represented in the commercial marketplace by many insurance companies of varying size as well as other
entities offering risk alternatives such as self-insured retentions or captive programs. market competition works within the insurance regulatory framework to set the price charged for
insurance products and the level of service provided. a company's success in the competitive commercial insurance landscape is largely measured by its ability to provide insurance and services at a
price and on terms that are reasonable and acceptable to the customer, as well as its ability to retain existing customers and to attract new customers.
select
accounts business is typically written through independent agents and, to a lesser extent, regional brokers and direct writers. both national and regional property casualty
insurance companies compete in the select accounts market which generally comprises lower hazard, "main street" business customers. risks are underwritten and priced using standard industry practices
and a combination of proprietary and standard industry product offerings. competition in this market is primarily based on product offerings, service levels, ease of doing business and price. select
accounts has established a strong marketing relationship with its distribution network and has provided it with defined underwriting policies, a broad array of products, competitive prices and an
efficient automated
environment. in addition, the company has established centralized service centers to help agents perform many service functions, in return for a fee.
commercial
accounts business has historically been principally written through independent agents and brokers. competitors in this market are primarily national property casualty
insurance companies willing to write most classes of business using traditional products and pricing, and regional insurance companies. companies compete based on product offerings, service levels,
price and claim and loss prevention services. efficiency through automation and rapid response time to customer needs is key to success in this market.
the
national accounts group is comprised of three business units:
national accounts business is typically written through national brokers and, to a lesser extent, regional brokers.
insurance companies compete in this market based on price, product offerings, claim and loss prevention services, managed care cost containment and risk management information systems. national
accounts also offers a large network of localized claim service centers which allows national accounts the flexibility to more quickly respond to the needs of its customers.
discover re competes with traditional providers of commercial insurance coverages, as well as other underwriters of
property and casualty insurance in the alternative risk transfer market, such as risk retention groups, self-insurance plans, captives managed by others, and a variety of other
risk-financing vehicles and mechanisms.
national accounts' residual market business competes for state contracts to provide claims and policy management services.
these contracts, which generally have three-year terms, are selected by state agencies through a bid process based on the quality of service and price. national accounts services
approximately 33% of the total workers' compensation assigned risk market, making the company one of the largest servicing carriers in the industry.
there
are several other business groups in business insurance that compete in focused target markets. each of these markets is different and requires unique combinations of industry
knowledge, customized coverage, specialized risk control and loss handling services, and partnerships with agents and brokers that also focus on these markets. some of these business groups compete
with national carriers with similarly dedicated underwriting and marketing groups, whereas others compete with smaller regional companies. in either case, these businesses have regional structures
that allow them to deliver personalized service and local knowledge to their customer base. specialized agents and
table of contents
brokers,
including managing general agents and wholesale agents, supplement this strategy. in all of these businesses, the competitive strategy is market leadership attained through focused industry
knowledge applied to insurance and risk needs.
financial, professional& international insurance
the financial, professional& international insurance segment includes surety and financial liability coverages, which primarily
use credit-based underwriting processes, as well as property and casualty products that are primarily marketed on a domestic basis in the united kingdom, the republic of ireland and canada, and on an
international basis through lloyd's. the segment includes the following groups:
bond& financial products provides a wide range of customers with
bond and insurance products and risk management services. the range of coverages includes surety and fidelity bonds for construction and general commercial enterprises; professional liability and
management liability for public corporations, private companies and not-for-profit organizations for losses caused by the negligence or misconduct of named directors and
officers; professional liability for a variety of professionals, such as lawyers, design professionals and real estate agents for liability from errors and omissions committed in the course of
professional conduct or practice; and a full range of property, auto, liability, fidelity and professional/management liability insurance for financial institutions, with a special focus on community
banks.
international includes business written through domestic operations in the
united kingdom, canada and the republic of ireland and business written as a corporate member at lloyd's. international, through its operations in the united kingdom, canada and the republic of
ireland, offers specialized insurance and risk management services to several customer groups, including those in the technology, public services, and financial and professional services industry
sectors. international, through its lloyd's syndicate (syndicate 5000), for which the company provides 100% of the capital, underwrites through five principal business unitsaviation,
marine, global property, accident& special risks, and power& utilities.
selected market and product information
the following table sets forth financial, professional& international insurance net written premiums by market and product line
for the periods indicated. for a description of the markets and product lines referred to in the table, see "principal markets and methods of distribution" and "product
lines," respectively.
(for the year ended december31, in millions)
% of total
by market:
bond& financial products
$
2,228
$
2,228
$
2,255
64.2
%
international
1,240
1,237
1,138
35.8
total financial, professional& international insurance by market
$
3,468
$
3,465
$
3,393
100.0
%
by product line:
fidelity and surety
$
1,172
$
1,152
$
1,125
33.8
%
general liability
1,006
26.6
international
1,240
1,237
1,138
35.8
other
3.8
total financial, professional& international insurance by product line
$
3,468
$
3,465
$
3,393
100.0
%
table of contents
in
march 2007, the company completed the sale of its mexican surety subsidiary, afianzadora insurgentes,s.a. de c.v., which accounted for $25million and
$78million of net written premiums for the years ended december31, 2007 and 2006, respectively. the impact of this transaction was not material to the company's results of operations
or financial position.
principal markets and methods of distribution
within the financial, professional& international insurance segment, bond& financial products distributes the majority
of its products in the united states through approximately 6,900 of the same independent agencies and brokers that distribute the business insurance segment's products. these brokers and independent
agencies are located throughout the united states. bond& financial products, in conjunction with the business insurance segment, continues to make investments in enhanced technology utilizing
internet-based applications to provide real-time interface capabilities with its independent agencies and brokers. bond& financial products builds relationships with
well-established, independent insurance agencies and brokers. in selecting new independent agencies and brokers to distribute its products, bond& financial products considers,
among other attributes, each agency's or broker's profitability, financial stability, staff experience and strategic fit with its operating and marketing plans. once an agency or broker is appointed,
its ongoing performance is closely monitored. in addition, bond& financial products sells its surety products through independent agents using subsidiaries in canada and the united kingdom.
the
international market distributes its products through brokers in the domestic markets of each of the three countries in which it operates, the united kingdom, canada and the republic
of ireland. it also writes business at lloyd's, where its products are distributed through lloyd's wholesale and retail
brokers. by virtue of lloyd's worldwide licenses, financial, professional& international insurance has access to international markets across the world.
pricing and underwriting
pricing of financial, professional& international insurance property and casualty insurance products is generally developed
based upon an estimation of expected losses, the expenses of producing, issuing and servicing business and managing claims, the time value of money associated with such loss and expense cash flows,
and a reasonable allowance for profit. the company has a disciplined approach to underwriting and risk management that emphasizes profitable growth rather than premium volume or market share.
financial,
professional& international insurance has developed an underwriting and pricing methodology that incorporates dedicated underwriting, claims, engineering, actuarial
and product development disciplines. this approach is designed to maintain high quality underwriting and pricing discipline, based on an in-depth knowledge of the specific account or
industry issues. the underwriters use industry and proprietary data gathered and analyzed over many years to assess and evaluate risks prior to quotation, and then use proprietary forms (for domestic
non-lloyd's markets) to tailor insurance coverage to insureds within the target markets. this methodology enables financial, professional& international insurance to streamline its
risk selection process and develop pricing parameters that will preserve its underwriting integrity.
the
company continually monitors its exposure to natural and man-made peril catastrophic losses and attempts to manage such exposure. the company uses various analyses and
methods, including sophisticated computer modeling techniques, to analyze underwriting risks of business in hurricane-prone, earthquake-prone and target risk areas for terrorism. the company relies,
in part, upon this analysis to make underwriting decisions designed to manage its exposure on catastrophe-exposed business. see "item7management's discussion and analysis of
financial condition and results of
table of contents
operationscatastrophe
modeling." the company also utilizes reinsurance to manage its aggregate exposures to catastrophes. see "reinsurance."
product lines
fidelity and surety provides fidelity insurance coverage, which protects an insured for
loss due to embezzlement or misappropriation of funds by an employee, and surety, which is a three-party agreement whereby the insurer agrees to pay a third party or make complete an obligation in
response to the default, acts or omissions of an insured. surety is generally provided for construction performance, legal matters such as appeals, trustees in bankruptcy and probate and other
performance bonds. in addition to the business written in the united states, this product line includes surety business written in the following subsidiaries of the company: travelers guarantee
(canada) and travelers casualty and surety company of europe (united kingdom).
general liability provides coverage for liability exposures including bodily injury and property damage arising from products sold and
general business operations. specialized liability policies may also include coverage for directors' and officers' liability arising in their official capacities, employment practices liability
insurance, fiduciary liability for trustees and sponsors of pension, health and welfare, and other employee benefit plans, errors and omissions insurance for employees, agents, professionals and
others arising from acts or failures to act under specified circumstances, as well as umbrella and excess insurance. errors and omissions insurance for professionals (such as lawyers, accountants,
architects and engineers) is sometimes also known as professional liability insurance.
international provides coverage through domestic operations in the united kingdom, canada and the republic of ireland, and through the
company's operations at lloyd's. the coverage provided in those markets includes employers' liability (similar to workers' compensation coverage in the united states), public and product liability
(the equivalent of general liability), professional indemnity (similar to professional liability coverage), motor (similar to automobile coverage in the united states), property (similar to property
in the united states), marine, aviation, personal accident and kidnap& ransom. marine provides coverage for ship hulls, cargoes carried, private yachts, marine-related liability, offshore
energy and ports and terminals. aviation provides coverage for worldwide aviation risks including physical damage and liabilities for airline, aerospace, general aviation, aviation war and space
risks. personal accident provides financial protection in the event of death or disablement due to accidental bodily injury, while kidnap& ransom provides financial protection against kidnap,
hijack, illegal detention and extortion. while the covered hazards may be similar to those in the u.s. market, the different legal environments can make the product risks and coverage terms
potentially very different from those in the united states.
other coverages include property, workers' compensation, commercial automobile and commercial multi-peril, which are described in more
detail in the "business insurance" section of this narrative.
net retention policy
the following discussion reflects the company's retention policy with respect to the financial, professional& international
insurance segment as of january1, 2009. in the u.s. operations for third party liability, including but not limited to umbrella liability, professional liability, directors' and officers'
liability, and employment practices liability, financial, professional& international insurance generally limits net retentions, through the use of reinsurance, up to $15.3million per
policy after retaining a layer of expected losses. for surety protection, the company generally retains up to $55.0million probable maximum loss (pml) per principal but may retain higher
amounts based on the type of obligation, credit quality and other credit risk factors. in the international operations, per-risk retentions range from $4.0million to
$19.5million. reinsurance treaties often have aggregate limits or
table of contents
caps
which may result in larger net per risk retentions if the aggregate limits or caps are reached. the company utilizes facultative reinsurance to provide additional limits capacity or to reduce
retentions on an individual risk basis. the company may also retain amounts greater than those described herein based upon the individual characteristics of the risk.
geographic distribution
the following table shows the geographic distribution of financial, professional& international's direct written premiums for
the states that accounted for the majority of premium volume for the year ended december31, 2008:
state
% of
total
california
5.9
%
new york
5.6
texas
4.5
florida
3.5
all other domestic(1)
43.2
total domestic
62.7
total international
37.3
total
100.0
%
(1)no
other single state within the united states accounted for 3.0% or more of the total direct written premiums written in 2008 by the financial,
professional& international insurance segment.
competition
the competitive landscape in which bond& financial products operates is affected by many of the same factors described
previously for the business insurance segment. competitors in this market are primarily national property and casualty insurance companies willing to write most classes of business using traditional
products and pricing and, to a lesser extent, regional insurance companies and companies that have developed niche programs for specific industry segments.
bond&
financial products underwrites and markets its products to national, mid-sized and small businesses and organizations, as well as individuals, and distributes
them through both national and wholesale brokers, regional brokers and retail agents. its reputation for timely and consistent decision making, a nationwide network of local underwriting, claims and
industry experts and strong producer and customer relationships, as well as its ability to offer its customers a full range of products, provides bond& financial products an advantage over
many of its competitors and enables it to compete effectively in a complex, dynamic marketplace. the ability of bond& financial products to
cross-sell its products to customers of the business insurance and personal insurance segments provides additional competitive advantages for the company.
international
competes with numerous international and domestic insurers in the united kingdom, canada and the republic of ireland. companies compete on the basis of price, product
offerings and the level of claim and risk management services provided. the company has developed expertise in various markets in these countries similar to those served in the united states and
provides both property and casualty coverage for these markets. products are generally distributed through a relatively small broker base whose customer groups align with the company's targeted
markets.
table of contents
at
lloyd's, international competes with other syndicates operating in the lloyd's market as well as international and domestic insurers in the various markets where the lloyd's operation
writes business worldwide. lloyd's syndicates are increasingly capitalized by corporate capital, much of which is provided by large international insurance enterprises. competition is again based on
price, product and service offerings. the company focuses on lines it believes it can underwrite effectively and profitably with an emphasis on short-tail insurance lines. the company
underwrites through five principal business units at lloyd's: aviation, marine, global property, accident& special risks, and power& utilities.
personal insurance
personal insurance writes a broad range of property and casualty insurance covering personal risks. the primary coverages in personal
insurance are automobile and homeowners insurance sold to individuals. these products are distributed through independent agents, sponsoring organizations such as employee and affinity groups, joint
marketing arrangements with other insurers, and direct marketing.
selected product and distribution channel information
the following table sets forth net written premiums for personal insurance by product line for the periods indicated. for a description
of the product lines referred to in
the following table, see "product lines." in addition, see "principal markets and methods of distribution" for a discussion of distribution channels for personal insurance's
product lines.
(for the year ended december31, in millions)
% of total
by product line:
personal automobile
$
3,660
$
3,628
$
3,692
52.3
%
homeowners and other
3,335
3,207
3,019
47.7
total personal insurance
$
6,995
$
6,835
$
6,711
100.0
%
in
april 2007, the company completed the sale of its subsidiary, mendota insurance company, and its wholly-owned subsidiaries, mendakota insurance company and mendota insurance
agency,inc. these subsidiaries primarily offered nonstandard automobile coverage and accounted for $49million and $187million of net written premiums in the years ended
december31, 2007 and 2006, respectively. the sale was not material to the company's results of operations or financial position.
principal markets and methods of distribution
personal insurance products are distributed primarily through approximately 10,100 independent agents located throughout the united
states, supported by personnel in 13 marketing regions, three single state companies and five service centers. in selecting new independent agencies to distribute its products, personal insurance
considers, among other attributes, each agency's profitability, financial stability, staff experience and strategic fit with personal insurance's operating and marketing plans. once an agency is
appointed, personal insurance carefully monitors its performance. while the principal markets for personal insurance's insurance products are in states along the east coast, in the south and texas,
personal insurance continues to expand its geographic presence across the united states.
personal
insurance operates single-state operations in each of massachusetts, new jersey and florida with products marketed primarily through independent agents. these states represented
approximately 16% of personal insurance direct written premiums in 2008. these operations were established to manage complex markets in massachusetts and new jersey and property catastrophe
table of contents
exposure
in florida. massachusetts has dedicated resources in underwriting, claim, finance, legal and service functions. while new jersey and florida have also had dedicated resources, they are now
moving toward sharing resources in a similar manner as other marketing regions. the company continues to maintain its single state companies in each of these states.
personal
insurance uses a consistent operating model with agents outside of the single state companies discussed above. the model provides technological alternatives to agents to
maximize their ease of
doing business. personal insurance agents quote and issue approximately 97% of personal insurance's new business policies directly from their agencies by leveraging either their own agency management
system or using personal insurance's proprietary quote and issuance systems which allow agents to rate, quote and issue policies on line. all of these quote and issue platforms interface with personal
insurance's underwriting and rating systems, which edit transactions for compliance with personal insurance's underwriting and pricing programs. business processed by agents on these platforms is
subject to consultative review by personal insurance's in-house underwriters. personal insurance also provides a download capability that refreshes the individual agency system databases
of approximately 8,100 agents each day with updated policy information.
personal
insurance continues to develop functionality to provide its agents with a comprehensive array of online service capabilities packaged together in an
easy-to-use agency service portal, including customer service, marketing and claim functionality. agencies can also choose to shift the ongoing service responsibility for
personal insurance's customers to one of the company's four customer care centers, where the company provides, on behalf of an agency, a comprehensive array of direct customer service needs, including
response to billing and coverage inquiries, and policy changes. approximately 1,440 agents take advantage of this service alternative.
personal
insurance also markets through additional distribution channels, including sponsoring organizations such as employers and consumer associations, and direct marketing. personal
insurance handles the sales and service for these programs either through a sponsoring independent agent or through two of the company's call center locations. a number of well-known
corporations make the company's product offerings available to their employees primarily through a payroll deduction payment process. the company has significant relationships with the majority of the
american automobile association (aaa) clubs in the united states and other affinity groups that make available personal insurance's product offerings to their members. in addition, since 1995, the
company has had a marketing agreement with geico to underwrite homeowners business for their auto customers. this agreement has added profitable business and helped to geographically diversify the
homeowners line of business.
pricing and underwriting
pricing of personal insurance property and casualty insurance products is generally developed based upon an estimation of expected
losses, the expenses of producing, issuing and servicing business and managing claims, the time value of money associated with such loss and expense cash flows, and a reasonable allowance for profit.
the company has a disciplined approach to underwriting and risk management that emphasizes profitable growth rather than growth in premium volume or market share alone.
personal
insurance has developed a product management methodology that integrates the disciplines of underwriting, claim, actuarial and product development. this approach is designed to
maintain high quality underwriting discipline and pricing segmentation. proprietary data accumulated over many years
is analyzed with respect to personal insurance's business. personal insurance uses a variety of proprietary and vendor produced risk differentiation models to facilitate its pricing segmentation.
personal insurance's product managers establish underwriting guidelines integrated with its filed pricing and rating plans, which enable personal insurance to execute its risk selection and pricing
processes.
table of contents
pricing
for personal automobile insurance is driven in large part by changes in the frequency of claims and by inflation in the cost of automobile repairs, medical care and litigation of
liability claims. as a result, the profitability of the business is largely dependent on promptly identifying and responding to disparities between premium levels and projected claim costs, and
obtaining approval from state regulatory authorities when necessary for filed rate changes.
pricing
in the homeowners business is also driven in large part by changes in the frequency of claims and by inflation in the cost of building supplies, labor and household possessions.
most homeowners policies offer, but do not require, automatic increases in coverage to reflect growth in replacement costs. in addition to the normal risks associated with any multiple peril coverage,
the profitability and pricing of homeowners insurance is affected by the incidence of natural disasters, particularly those related to weather and earthquakes. in order to manage the company's
exposure to catastrophe losses, personal insurance limits the writing of new homeowners business and selectively takes underwriting action on existing business in some markets. in addition, the
company has tightened underwriting standards, implemented price increases in some catastrophe-prone areas and put in place deductibles specific to hurricane and wind- and
hail-prone areas. personal insurance uses sophisticated computer-modeling techniques to assess its level of exposure to loss in hurricane and earthquake catastrophe-prone areas. see
"item7management's discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operationscatastrophe modeling." the company also utilizes reinsurance to manage its
aggregate exposures to catastrophes. see "reinsurance." changes to methods of marketing and underwriting in some jurisdictions are subject to state-imposed restrictions, which can make it
more difficult for an insurer to significantly manage catastrophe exposures.
insurers
writing personal lines property and casualty policies may be unable to increase prices until some time after the costs associated with coverage have increased, primarily because
of state insurance rate regulation. the pace at which an insurer can change rates in response to increased costs depends, in part, on whether the applicable state law requires prior approval of rate
increases or notification to the regulator either before or after a rate change is imposed. in states with prior approval laws, rates must be approved by the regulator before being used by the
insurer. in states having "file-and-use" laws, the insurer must file rate changes with the regulator, but does not need to wait for approval before using the new rates. a
"use-and-file" law requires an insurer to file rates within a period of time after the insurer begins using the new rate. approximately one-half of the states
require prior approval of most rate changes. the company's ability or willingness to raise prices, modify underwriting terms or reduce exposure to certain geographies may be limited due to
considerations of
public policy, the evolving political environment and/or social responsibilities. the company also may choose to write business it might not otherwise write for strategic purposes, such as improving
access to other underwriting opportunities.
independent
agents either utilize one of the company's automated quote and issue systems or they submit applications to the company's service centers for underwriting review, quote, and
issuance. automated transactions are edited by the company's systems and issued if they conform to established guidelines. exceptions are reviewed by underwriters in the company's business centers.
audits are conducted by an internal peer review team across all of the company's independent agency generated business on a systematic sampling basis. each agent is assigned to a specific employee or
team of employees responsible for working with the agent on business plan development, marketing, and overall growth and profitability. the company uses agency level management information to analyze
and understand results and to identify problems and opportunities.
the
personal insurance products sold through additional marketing channels utilize the same issuance systems discussed previously and exceptions are underwritten by the company's
employees. underwriters work with company management on business plan development, marketing and overall growth and profitability. channel-specific production and claim information is used to analyze
results and identify problems and opportunities.
table of contents
product lines
the primary coverages in personal insurance are personal automobile and homeowners insurance sold to individuals. personal insurance
had approximately 7.4million policies in force at december31, 2008.
personal automobile provides coverage for liability to others for both bodily injury and property damage and for physical damage to an
insured's own vehicle from collision and various other perils. in addition, many states require policies to provide first-party personal injury protection, frequently referred to as
no-fault coverage.
homeowners and other provides protection against losses to dwellings and contents from a wide variety of perils (excluding flooding), as
well as coverage for personal liability. the company writes
homeowners insurance for dwellings, condominiums and rental property contents. the company also writes coverage for personal watercraft, personal articles such as jewelry, and umbrella liability
protection.
net retention policy
the following discussion reflects the company's retention policy with respect to the personal insurance segment as of january1,
2009. personal insurance retains the first $5.0million of umbrella policies and purchases facultative reinsurance for limits over $5.0million. for personal property insurance, there is
a $7.0million maximum retention per risk. the company utilizes facultative reinsurance to provide additional limits capacity or to reduce retentions on an individual risk basis. the company
may also retain amounts greater than those described herein based upon the individual characteristics of the risk.
geographic distribution
the following table shows the geographic distribution of personal insurance's direct written premiums for the states that accounted for
the majority of premium volume for the year ended december31, 2008:
state
% of
total
new york
15.1
%
texas
9.2
pennsylvania
7.6
new jersey
5.8
massachusetts
5.4
california
5.0
connecticut
4.8
georgia
4.7
virginia
4.5
florida
4.4
maryland
3.6
south carolina
3.2
all others(1)
26.7
total
100.0
%
(1)no
other single state accounted for 3.0% or more of the total direct written premiums written in 2008 by the personal insurance segment.
table of contents
competition
personal lines insurance is written by hundreds of insurance companies of varying sizes. although national companies write the majority
of the business, personal insurance also faces competition from local and regional companies. personal insurance primarily competes based on service, ease of doing business, price, perceived stability
of the insurer and name recognition. personal insurance competes for business within each independent agency since these agencies also offer policies of competing companies. at the agency level,
competition is primarily based on the level of service, including claims handling, as well as the level of automation and the development of long-term relationships with individual agents,
as well as on price. personal insurance also competes with insurance companies that use exclusive agents or salaried employees to sell their products, as well as those that employ direct marketing
strategies, including the use of toll-free numbers and the internet. in addition to its traditional independent agency distribution, personal insurance has broadened its distribution of
products by marketing to sponsoring organizations, including employee and affinity groups, through joint marketing arrangements with other insurers and direct marketing. personal insurance believes
that its continued focus on underwriting and pricing segmentation, claim settlement effectiveness strategies and expense management practices enable personal insurance to price its products
competitively in all of its distribution channels.
claims management
the company's claims function is managed through its claim services operations. with nearly 13,000 employees, claim services employs a
diverse group of professionals, including claim adjusters, appraisers, attorneys, investigators, engineers, accountants, system specialists and training, management and support personnel. approved
external service providers, such as independent adjusters and appraisers, investigators and attorneys, are available for use as appropriate.
field
claim management teams located in 27 claim centers and 87 satellite and specialty-only offices in 46 states are organized to maintain focus on the specific claim
characteristics unique to the businesses within the business insurance, financial, professional& international insurance, and personal insurance segments. claim teams with specialized skills,
resources, and workflows are matched to the unique exposures of those businesses with local claims management dedicated to achieving optimal results within each segment. the company's home office
operations provide additional support in the form of workflow design, quality management, information technology, advanced management information and data analysis, training, financial reporting and
control, and human resources strategy. this structure permits the company to maintain the economies of scale of a larger, established company while retaining the agility to respond promptly to the
needs of customers, brokers, agents and underwriters. claims management for international is generally provided locally by staff in the respective international location due to local knowledge of
applicable laws and regulations.
an
integral part of the company's strategy to benefit customers and shareholders is its continuing industry leadership in the fight against insurance fraud through its investigative
services unit. the company has a nationwide staff of experts that investigate a wide array of insurance fraud schemes using in-house forensic resources and other technological tools. this
staff also has specialized expertise in fire scene examinations, medical provider fraud schemes and data mining. the company also dedicates investigative resources to ensure that violations of law are
reported to and prosecuted by law enforcement agencies.
claim
services uses advanced technology, management information, and data analysis to assist the company in reviewing its claim practices and results to evaluate and improve its claims
management performance. the company's claims management strategy is focused on segmentation of claims and appropriate technical specialization to drive effective claim resolution. the company
continually monitors its investment in claim resources to maintain an effective focus on claim outcomes and a
table of contents
disciplined
approach to continual improvement. in 2007, the company opened a state-of-the-art claims training facility, offering hands-on experiential
learning to help ensure that its claim professionals are properly trained. in recent years, the company has invested significant additional resources in many of its claim
handling operations and routinely monitors the effect of its investments to ensure a consistent optimization among outcomes, cost and service.
during
2006, claim services refined its catastrophe response strategy to increase the company's ability to respond to a significant catastrophic event using its own personnel, enabling
it to minimize reliance on independent adjustors and appraisers. during 2007, the company continued to develop a larger dedicated catastrophe response team and trained a larger enterprise response
team of existing employees who can be deployed on short notice in the event of a catastrophe that generates claim volume exceeding the capacity of the dedicated catastrophe response team. in 2008,
these internal resources were successfully deployed to respond to a record number of catastrophe claims, including those resulting from hurricanes ike, gustav and dolly.
the
company continues to develop effective claim solutions that provide superior customer service. one example of this is the company's auto claim service that features two company-owned
auto repair facilities and selected independently-owned auto repair facilities with company appraisers on site to complete an estimate, handle all rental arrangements and monitor the repair process
from start to finish. by managing the claims in this way, the company can help ensure prompt, quality results and create a differentiated, superior claim experience for customers.
another
strategic advantage is travcompsm, a workers' compensation claim resolution and medical management program that assists adjusters in the prompt investigation and
effective management of workers' compensation claims. innovative medical and claims management technologies permit nurse, medical and claims professionals to share appropriate vital information that
supports prompt investigation, effective return to work and claim resolution strategies. these technologies, together with effective matching of professional skills and authority to specific claim
issues, have resulted in more efficient management of workers' compensation claims with lower medical, wage replacement costs and loss adjustment expenses.
reinsurance
the company reinsures a portion of the risks it underwrites in order to control its exposure to losses. the company cedes to reinsurers
a portion of these risks and pays premiums based upon the risk and exposure of the policies subject to such reinsurance. ceded reinsurance involves credit risk, except with regard to mandatory pools,
and is generally subject to aggregate loss limits. although the reinsurer is liable to the company to the extent of the reinsurance ceded, the company remains liable as the direct insurer on all risks
reinsured. reinsurance recoverables are reported after reductions for known insolvencies and after allowances for uncollectible amounts. the company also holds collateral, including trust agreements,
escrow funds and letters of credit, under certain reinsurance agreements. the company monitors the financial condition of reinsurers on an ongoing basis and reviews its reinsurance arrangements
periodically. reinsurers are selected based on their financial condition, business practices, the price of their product offerings and the value of collateral provided. after reinsurance is purchased,
the company has limited ability to
manage the credit risk to a reinsurer. in addition, in a number of jurisdictions, particularly the european union and the united kingdom, a reinsurer is permitted to transfer a reinsurance arrangement
to another reinsurer, which may be less creditworthy, without a counterparty's consent, provided that the transfer has been approved by the applicable regulatory and/or court authority. for additional
information concerning reinsurance, see note5 of notes to the company's consolidated financial statements and "item1arisk factors."
table of contents
the
company utilizes a variety of reinsurance agreements to manage its exposure to large property and casualty losses, including:
facultative reinsurance, in which reinsurance is provided for all or a portion of the insurance provided by a single
policy and each policy reinsured is separately negotiated;
treaty reinsurance, in which reinsurance is provided for a specified type or category of risks; and
catastrophe reinsurance, in which the company is indemnified for an amount of loss in excess of a specified retention with
respect to losses resulting from a catastrophic event.
for
a description of reinsurance-related litigation, see "item3legal proceedings."
catastrophe reinsurance
catastrophes can be caused by various natural and man-made events including hurricanes, windstorms, earthquakes, hail,
severe winter
weather, explosions and fires. the incidence and severity of catastrophes are inherently unpredictable. the extent of losses from a catastrophe is a function of both the total amount of insured
exposure in the area affected by the event and the severity of the event. most catastrophes are restricted to small geographic areas; however, hurricanes and earthquakes may produce significant damage
in larger areas, especially those areas that are heavily populated. the company generally seeks to manage its exposure to catastrophes through individual risk selection and the purchase of catastrophe
reinsurance. the company utilizes a general catastrophe reinsurance treaty with unaffiliated reinsurers to manage its exposure to losses resulting from catastrophes. in addition to the coverage
provided under this treaty, the company also utilizes a catastrophe bond program, as well as a northeast catastrophe reinsurance treaty, to protect against losses resulting from catastrophes in the
northeastern united states.
general catastrophe reinsurance treaty.the general catastrophe reinsurance treaty covers the accumulation of net property losses
arising out of one
occurrence. the treaty only provides coverage for terrorism events in limited circumstances and excludes entirely losses arising from nuclear, biological, chemical or radiological attacks. the treaty
covers all of the company's exposures in the united states and canada and their possessions and waters contiguous thereto, the caribbean and mexico. for business underwritten in canada, the united
kingdom, republic of ireland and in the company's operations at lloyd's, separate reinsurance protections are purchased locally that have lower net retentions more commensurate with the size of the
respective local balance sheet. the company conducts an ongoing review of its risk and catastrophe coverages and makes changes as it deems appropriate.
the
following table summarizes the company's coverage under its general catastrophe treaty, effective for the period july1, 2008 through june30, 2009:
layer of loss
reinsurance coverage in-force
$0 - $1.0billion
loss 100% retained by the company
$1.0billion - $1.5billion
20.0% ($100million) of loss covered by treaty; 80.0%($400million) of loss retained by company
$1.5billion - $2.25billion
56.7% ($425million) of loss covered by treaty; 43.3%($325million) of loss retained by company
greater than $2.25billion
100% of loss retained by company, except for certain losses incurred in the northeastern united states, which are covered by the catastrophe bond program and northeast catastrophe treaty as described below.
table of contents
catastrophe bond program.in may 2007, the company announced the establishment of a multi-year catastrophe bond program to provide
reinsurance protection for losses resulting from hurricanes and certain other catastrophes in the northeast united states (from new jersey to maine). the company may obtain reinsurance under the
program by entering into one or more reinsurance agreements with longpoint reltd. (longpoint re), a newly-formed independent cayman islands insurance company. longpoint re successfully
completed an offering to unrelated investors under the program of $500million aggregate principal amount of catastrophe bonds on may8, 2007. in connection with the offering, the
company and longpoint re entered into a three-year reinsurance agreement providing up to $500million of reinsurance from losses resulting from certain hurricane events in the
northeast united states. the reinsurance agreement entered into by the company and longpoint re utilizes a dual trigger that is based upon the company's covered losses incurred and an index that is
created by applying predetermined percentages to insured industry losses in each state in the covered area as reported by property claim services, a division of insurance services offices,inc.
amounts payable to the company under the reinsurance agreement will be determined by the index-based losses, which are designed to approximate the company's actual losses from any covered event. the
principal amount of the catastrophe bonds will be reduced by any amounts paid to the company under the reinsurance agreement. the index-based losses attachment point and maximum limit are reset
annually to maintain a probability of loss on the catastrophe bonds equal to the initial modeled probability of loss. for the period may8, 2007 through may7, 2008, the company was
entitled to begin recovering amounts under the reinsurance agreement if the index-based losses in the covered area for a single occurrence reached an initial attachment amount of $2.25billion.
the full coverage amount of $500million was available on a proportional basis until index-based losses reach a maximum $3.0billion limit. in accordance with the program, the
index-based losses attachment point and maximum limit were reset on may8, 2008. through may7, 2009, the company will be entitled to begin recovering amounts under the reinsurance
agreement if the index-based losses in the covered area for a single occurrence reach an initial attachment amount of $2.425billion. the full coverage amount of $500million is
available on a proportional basis until index-based losses reach a maximum $3.22billion limit. the company has not incurred any losses subject to the agreement since its inception.
the
$500million limit is secured by a combination of assets held in a trust and a total return swap with goldman sachs international that is guaranteed by the goldman sachs
group,inc. (goldman sachs). the value of the trust assets at december31, 2008 was estimated by goldman sachs to be $342million. subsequent to december31, 2008, one
asset of the trust failed to meet the investment guidelines of the trust and, accordingly, was sold on february11, 2009. pursuant to the total return swap, upon sale of the asset, goldman
sachs contributed cash to the trust equal to the difference between the sale proceeds of $53million and the $100million face value of the asset.
northeast catastrophe reinsurance treaty.in addition to its general catastrophe treaty and its multi-year catastrophe bond program,
the
company also is party to a northeast general catastrophe treaty which provides up to $500million of coverage, subject to a $2.25billion retention, for losses arising from hurricanes,
earthquakes and winter storm or freeze losses from virginia to maine for the period july1, 2008 through june30, 2009. losses from a covered event (occurring over several days) anywhere
in the united states, canada, the caribbean and mexico may be used to satisfy the retention. recoveries under the catastrophe bond program described above (if any) would be first applied to reduce
losses subject to this treaty.
terrorism risk insurance acts.on november26, 2002, the terrorism risk insurance act of 2002 (the terrorism act) was enacted into
federal law
and established the terrorism risk insurance program (the program), a temporary federal program in the department of the treasury, that provided for a system of shared public and private compensation
for certain insured losses resulting from acts of terrorism or war committed by or on behalf of a foreign interest. the program was scheduled to
table of contents
terminate
on december31, 2005. in december 2005, the terrorism risk insurance extension act of 2005 (the terrorism extension act) was enacted into federal law, reauthorizing the program
through december31, 2007, while reducing the federal role under the program. in december 2007, the terrorism risk insurance program reauthorization act of 2007 was enacted into federal law,
extending coverage to include domestic acts of terrorism and reauthorizing the program through 2014. the three acts are hereinafter collectively referred to as "the acts."
in
order for a loss to be covered under the program (subject losses), the loss must meet certain aggregate industry loss minimums and must be the result of an event that is certified as
an act of terrorism by the u.s. secretary of the treasury. the annual aggregate industry loss minimum is $100million through 2014. the original program excluded from participation certain of
the following types of insurance: federal crop insurance, private mortgage insurance, financial guaranty insurance, medical malpractice insurance, health or life insurance, flood insurance, and
reinsurance. the terrorism extension act exempted from coverage certain additional types of insurance, including commercial automobile, professional liability (other than directors and officers'),
surety, burglary and theft, and farm-owners multi-peril. in the case of a war declared by congress, only workers' compensation losses are covered by the acts. the acts generally require
that all commercial property casualty insurers licensed in the united states participate in the program. under the program, a participating insurer is entitled to be reimbursed by the federal
government for 85% of subject losses, after an insurer deductible, subject to an annual cap. the federal reimbursement percentage is 85% through 2014.
the
deductible for any calendar year is equal to 20% of the insurer's direct earned premiums for covered lines for the calendar year. the company's estimated deductible under the program
is $2.16billion for 2009. the annual cap limits the amount of aggregate subject losses for all participating insurers to $100billion. once subject losses have reached the
$100billion aggregate during a program year, participating insurers will not be liable under the program for additional covered terrorism losses for that program year. the company has had no
terrorism-related losses since the program was established. because the acts are relatively new and their interpretation is untested, there may be uncertainty as to how they will be applied to
specific circumstances. further, given the unpredictable frequency and severity of terrorism losses, as well as the limited terrorism coverage in the company's own reinsurance program, future losses
from acts of terrorism, particularly those involving nuclear, biological, chemical or radiological events, could be material to the company's operating results, financial position and/or liquidity in
future periods. the company will continue to manage this type of catastrophic risk by monitoring and controlling terrorism risk aggregations to the best of its ability.
claims and claim adjustment expense reserves
claims and claim adjustment expense reserves (loss reserves) represent management's estimate of ultimate unpaid costs of losses and
loss adjustment expenses for claims that have been reported and claims that have been incurred but not yet reported.
the
company continually refines its reserve estimates in a regular ongoing process that includes review of key assumptions, underlying variables and historical loss experience. the
company reflects adjustments to reserves in the results of operations in the periods in which the estimates are changed. in establishing reserves, the company takes into account estimated recoveries
for reinsurance, salvage and subrogation. the reserves are also reviewed regularly by qualified actuaries employed by the company. for additional information on the process of estimating reserves and
a discussion of underlying variables and risk factors, see "item7management's discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operationscritical
accounting estimates."
the
process of estimating loss reserves involves a high degree of judgment and is subject to a number of variables. these variables (discussed by product line in the "critical accounting
estimates" section of "item7management's discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of
table of contents
operations")
are affected by both internal and external events, such as changes in claims handling procedures, inflation, judicial trends and legislative changes, among others. the impact of many of
these items on ultimate costs for claims and claim adjustment expenses is difficult to estimate. reserve estimation difficulties also differ significantly by product line due to differences in the
underlying insurance contract (e.g.,claims-made versus occurrence), claim complexity, the volume of claims, the potential severity of individual claims, the determination of the
occurrence date for a claim, and reporting lags (the time between the occurrence of the insured event and when it is actually reported to the insurer). informed judgment is applied throughout the
process.
the
company derives estimates for unreported claims and development on reported claims principally from actuarial analyses of historical patterns of loss development by accident year for
each type of exposure and business unit. similarly, the company derives estimates of unpaid loss adjustment expenses principally from actuarial analyses of historical development patterns of the
relationship of loss adjustment expenses to losses for each line of business and type of exposure. for a description of the company's reserving methods for asbestos and environmental claims, see
"item7management's discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operationsasbestos claims and litigation," and "environmental claims and
litigation."
discounting
included in the claims and claim adjustment expense reserves in the consolidated balance sheet are certain reserves discounted to the
present value of estimated future payments. the liabilities for losses for most long-term disability payments under workers' compensation insurance and workers' compensation excess
insurance, which totaled $2.25billion and $2.09billion at december31, 2008 and 2007, respectively, were discounted using a rate of 5% at december31, 2008 and 2007.
reserves totaling $33million for certain assumed reinsurance business at december31, 2007 were discounted using a rate of 7%. no reserves for such assumed reinsurance business were
discounted at december31, 2008.
claims and claim adjustment expense development table
the table that follows sets forth the year-end reserves from 1998 through 2008 and the subsequent changes in those
reserves, presented on a historical basis. the original estimates, cumulative amounts paid and reestimated reserves in the table for the years 1998 through 2003 have not been restated to reflect the
acquisition of spc in 2004. the table includes spc reserves beginning at december31, 2004.
in
addition, the original estimates, cumulative amounts paid and reestimated reserves in the table for the years 1998 to 2000 have not been restated to reflect the acquisition of
northland and commercial guaranty casualty. beginning in 2001, the table includes the reserve activity of northland and commercial guaranty casualty. the data in the table is presented in accordance
with reporting requirements of the securities and exchange commission (sec). care must be taken to avoid misinterpretation by those unfamiliar with this information or familiar with other data
commonly reported by the insurance industry. the data in the table is not accident year data, but rather a display of 1998 to 2008year-end reserves and the subsequent changes in
those reserves.
for
instance, the "cumulative deficiency (redundancy)" shown in the table for each year represents the aggregate amount by which original estimates of reserves as of that
year-end have changed in subsequent years. accordingly, the cumulative deficiency for a year relates only to reserves at that year-end and those amounts are not additive.
expressed another way, if the original reserves at the end of 1998 included $4million for a loss that is finally paid in 2005 for $5million, the $1million deficiency (the
excess of the actual payment of $5million over the original estimate of $4million)
table of contents
would
be included in the cumulative deficiencies in each of the years 1998 to 2004 shown in the accompanying table.
various
factors may distort the re-estimated reserves and cumulative deficiency or redundancy shown in the table. for example, a substantial portion of the cumulative
deficiencies shown in the table arise from claims on policies written prior to the mid-1980s involving liability exposures such as asbestos and environmental claims. in the
post-1984 period, the company has developed more stringent underwriting standards and policy exclusions and has significantly contracted or terminated the writing of these risks. see
"item7management's discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operationsasbestos claims and litigation," and "environmental claims and
litigation." general conditions and trends that have affected the development of these liabilities in the past will not necessarily recur in the future.
other
factors that affect the data in the table include the discounting of certain reserves (as discussed above) and the use of retrospectively rated insurance policies. for example,
workers' compensation indemnity reserves (tabular reserves) are discounted to reflect the time value of money. apparent deficiencies will continue to occur as the discount on these workers'
compensation reserves is accreted at the appropriate interest rates. also, a portion of national accounts business is underwritten with retrospectively rated insurance policies in which the ultimate
loss experience is primarily borne by the insured. for this business, increases in loss experience result in an increase in reserves and an offsetting increase in amounts recoverable from insureds.
likewise, decreases in loss experience result in a decrease in reserves and an offsetting decrease in amounts recoverable from these insureds. the amounts recoverable on these retrospectively rated
policies mitigate the impact of the cumulative deficiencies or redundancies on the company's earnings but are not reflected in the table.
because
of these and other factors, it is difficult to develop a meaningful extrapolation of estimated future redundancies or deficiencies in loss reserves from the data in the table.
table of contents
(at december31, in millions)
2001(a)
2002(a)
2003(a)
2004(a)(b)(c)
2005(a)(b)(c)
2006(a)(b)(c)
2007(a)(b)(c)
2008(a)(b)(c)
reserves for claims and claim adjustment expense originally estimated
$
20,763
$
19,983
$
19,435
$
20,197
$
23,268
$
24,055
$
41,446
$
42,895
$
42,844
$
43,098
$
41,312
cumulative amounts paid as of
one year later
4,159
4,082
4,374
5,018
5,170
4,651
8,871
8,632
7,417
8,146
two years later
6,879
6,957
7,517
8,745
8,319
8,686
14,666
13,837
13,181
three years later
9,006
9,324
10,218
11,149
11,312
11,541
18,733
18,466
four years later
10,809
11,493
12,000
13,402
13,548
13,708
22,514
five years later
12,565
12,911
13,603
15,115
15,229
15,574
six years later
13,647
14,172
14,958
16,473
16,836
seven years later
14,697
15,301
16,063
17,877
eight years later
15,681
16,206
17,283
nine years later
16,480
17,194
ten years later
17,398
reserves reestimated as of
one year later
20,521
19,736
19,394
23,228
23,658
24,222
41,706
42,466
42,172
41,373
two years later
20,172
19,600
22,233
24,083
24,592
25,272
42,565
42,311
40,837
three years later
19,975
22,302
22,778
25,062
25,553
26,042
42,940
41,692
four years later
22,489
22,612
23,871
25,953
26,288
26,501
43,148
five years later
22,593
23,591
24,872
26,670
26,731
26,803
six years later
23,492
24,559
25,521
27,179
27,055
seven years later
24,446
25,114
26,039
27,556
eight years later
24,908
25,664
26,364
nine years later
25,435
25,917
ten years later
25,693
cumulative deficiency (redundancy)(a)(b)
4,930
5,934
6,929
7,359
3,787
2,748
1,702
(1,203
)
(2,007
)
(1,725
)
gross liabilityend of year
$
29,411
$
28,854
$
28,312
$
30,617
$
33,628
$
34,474
$
58,984
$
61,007
$
59,202
$
57,619
$
54,646
reinsurance recoverables
8,648
8,871
8,877
10,420
10,360
10,419
17,538
18,112
16,358
14,521
13,334
net liabilityend of year
$
20,763
$
19,983
$
19,435
$
20,197
$
23,268
$
24,055
$
41,446
$
42,895
$
42,844
$
43,098
$
41,312
gross reestimated liabilitylatest
$
34,961
$
35,977
$
37,245
$
40,006
$
38,865
$
37,829
$
61,036
$
59,999
$
56,911
$
55,967
reestimated reinsurance recoverableslatest
9,268
10,060
10,881
12,450
11,810
11,026
17,888
18,307
16,074
14,594
net reestimated liabilitylatest
$
25,693
$
25,917
$
26,364
$
27,556
$
27,055
$
26,803
$
43,148
$
41,692
$
40,837
$
41,373
gross cumulative deficiency (redundancy)
$
5,550
$
7,123
$
8,933
$
9,389
$
5,237
$
3,355
$
2,052
$
(1,008
)
$
(2,291
)
$
(1,652
)
included in the cumulative deficiency (redundancy) by year is the following impact of unfavorable prior year reserve development related to
asbestos and environmental claims and claim adjustment expenses, in millions:
asbestos
gross
$
5,974
$
5,846
$
5,659
$
5,377
$
1,717
$
1,692
$
1,100
$
$
$
net
$
4,385
$
4,328
$
4,278
$
4,091
$
1,146
$
1,122
$
1,057
$
$
$
environmental
gross
$
1,069
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
net
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
(a)includes
reserves of the northland company and its subsidiaries and commercial guaranty lloyds insurance company, which were acquired from citigroup on
october1, 2001. also includes reserves of commercial guaranty casualty insurance company, which was contributed to tpc by citigroup on october3, 2001. at december31, 2001,
these gross reserves were $867million, and net reserves were $633million.
(b)for
years prior to 2004, excludes spc reserves, which were acquired on april1, 2004. accordingly, the reserve development (net reserves for claims
and claim adjustment expense reestimated as of subsequent years less net reserves recorded at the end of the year, as originally estimated) for years prior to 2004 relates only to losses recorded by
tpc and does not include reserve development recorded by spc. for 2004 and subsequent years, includes spc reserves and subsequent development recorded by spc. at december31, 2004, spc gross
reserves were $23,274million, and net reserves were $15,959million.
(c)in
december 2008, the company completed the sale of unionamerica holdings limited (unionamerica), which comprised its united kingdom (u.k.)-based runoff
insurance and reinsurance businesses. (unionamerica was acquired in 2004 as part of the merger of spc and tpc.) immediately before the sale, the claims and claim adjustment expense reserves of
unionamerica totaled $790million. as a result of the sale, those obligations ceased being the responsibility of the company and its affiliates. the sale is reflected in the table as a
reduction in december31, 2008 net reserves of $790million and as a $790million increase in paid losses for each of the years 2004 through 2007 to reflect the transfer (payment)
of the reserves to the buyer, resulting in no impact to incurred losses.
table of contents
reserves on statutory accounting basis
at december31, 2008, 2007 and 2006, claims and claim adjustment expense reserves (net of reinsurance) shown in the preceding
table, which are prepared in accordance with u.s. generally accepted accounting principles (gaap reserves), were $5million higher, $30million higher and $104million lower,
respectively, than those reported in the company's respective annual reports filed with insurance regulators, which are prepared in accordance with statutory accounting practices (statutory reserves).
the differences between gaap and statutory reserves are primarily due to the differences in gaap and statutory accounting for two items, (1)fees associated with billing of required
reimbursements under large deductible business, and (2)the accounting for retroactive reinsurance. for large deductible business, the company pays the deductible portion of a casualty
insurance claim and then seeks reimbursement from the insured, plus a fee. this fee is reported as fee income for gaap reporting, but as an offset to claim expenses paid for statutory reporting.
retroactive reinsurance balances result from reinsurance placed to cover losses on insured events occurring prior to the inception of a reinsurance contract. for gaap reporting, retroactive
reinsurance balances are included in reinsurance recoverables and result in lower net reserve amounts. statutory accounting practices require retroactive reinsurance balances to be recorded in other
liabilities as contra-liabilities rather than in loss reserves.
asbestos and environmental claims
asbestos and environmental claims are segregated from other claims and are handled separately by the company's special liability group,
a separate unit staffed by dedicated legal, claim, finance and engineering professionals. for additional information on asbestos and environmental claims, see "item7management's
discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operationsasbestos claims and litigation" and "environmental claims and litigation."
intercompany reinsurance pooling arrangements
most of the company's insurance subsidiaries are members of an intercompany property and casualty reinsurance pooling arrangement.
pooling arrangements permit the participating companies to rely on the capacity of the entire pool's capital and surplus rather than just on its own capital and surplus. under such arrangements, the
members share substantially all insurance business that is written and allocate the combined premiums, losses and expenses.
on
october1, 2007, retroactive to january1, 2007, the northland pool was commuted and terminated. four members of the former northland pool, consisting of northland
insurance company, northfield insurance company, northland casualty company and american equity specialty insurance company, became members of the travelers reinsurance pool. the fifth member of the
former northland pool, american equity insurance company, became a 100% reinsured affiliate of the travelers reinsurance pool. additionally, the individual 100% quota share reinsurance agreements for
three former 100% reinsured affiliated companies of the travelers reinsurance pool (st.paul guardian insurance company, st.paul mercury insurance company and fidelity and guaranty
insurance underwriters,inc.) were commuted and terminated. these three companies also became members of the travelers reinsurance pool. all of these transactions were retroactive to
january1, 2007. in addition, on october1, 2007, discover reinsurance company was merged into the travelers indemnity company.
ratings
ratings are an important factor in setting the company's competitive position in the insurance industry. the company receives ratings
from the following major rating agencies:a.m. best company (a.m. best), fitch ratings (fitch), moody's investors service (moody's) and standard& poor's corp.
table of contents
(s&p).
rating agencies typically issue two types of ratings: claims-paying (or financial strength) ratings which assess an insurer's ability to meet its financial obligations to policyholders and debt
ratings which assess a company's prospects for repaying its debts and assist lenders in setting interest rates and terms for a company's short- and long-term borrowing needs. agency
ratings are not a recommendation to buy, sell or hold any security, and they may be revised or withdrawn at any time by the rating agency. each agency's rating should be evaluated independently of any
other agency's rating. the system and the number of rating categories can vary widely from rating agency to rating agency. customers usually focus on claims-paying ratings, while creditors focus on
debt ratings. investors use both to evaluate a company's overall financial strength. the ratings issued on the company or its subsidiaries by any of these agencies are announced publicly and are
available on the company's website and from the agencies.
the
company's insurance operations could be negatively impacted by a downgrade in one or more of the company's claims-paying or debt ratings. if this were to occur, the company could
experience a reduced demand for certain products in certain markets. additionally, the company's ability to access the capital markets could be impacted by a downgrade in one or more of the company's
debt ratings. if this were to occur, the company could incur higher borrowing costs.
claimspaying ratings
the following table summarizes the current claims-paying (or financial strength) ratings of the travelers reinsurance pool, travelers
c&sco. of america, travelers personal single state companies, travelers c&sco. of europe,ltd., travelers guarantee company of canada and travelers insurance company limited as
of february19, 2009. the table also presents s&p's lloyd's syndicate assessment rating for travelers syndicate managementsyndicate 5000. the table presents the position of each
rating in the applicable agency's rating scale.
a.m. best
moody's
s&p
fitch
travelers reinsurance pool(a)(b)
a+ (2ndof 16)
aa2 (3rdof 21
)
aa- (4thof 21
)
aa (3rdof 24
)
travelers c&sco. of america
a+ (2ndof 16)
aa2 (3rdof 21
)
aa- (4thof 21
)
aa (3rdof 24
)
first floridian auto and home ins.co.
a- (4thof 16)
aa (3rdof 24
)
first trenton indemnity company
a (3rdof 16)
aa (3rdof 24
)
the premier insurance company of massachusetts
a (3rdof 16)
travelers c&sco. of europe,ltd.
a+ (2ndof 16)
aa2 (3rdof 21
)
aa- (4thof 21
)
travelers guarantee company of canada
a (3rdof 16)
travelers insurance company limited
a (3rdof 16)
travelers syndicate management limitedsyndicate 5000
3- (9 of 15
)
(a)the
travelers reinsurance pool consists of: the travelers indemnity company, the charter oak fire insurance company, the phoenix insurance company, the
travelers indemnity company of connecticut, the travelers indemnity company of america, travelers property casualty company of america, travelers commercial casualty company, travco insurance company,
the travelers home and marine insurance company, travelers casualty and surety company, northland insurance company, northfield insurance company, northland casualty company, american equity specialty
insurance company, the standard fire insurance company, the automobile insurance company of hartford, connecticut, travelers casualty insurance company of america, farmington casualty company,
travelers commercial insurance company, travelers casualty company of connecticut, travelers property casualty insurance company, travelers personal security insurance company, travelers personal
insurance company, travelers excess and surplus lines company, st.paul fire and marine insurance company, st.paul surplus lines insurance company, athena assurance company,
st.paul protective insurance company, st.paul medical liability insurance company, st.paul guardian insurance company, st.paul mercury insurance company, fidelity and
table of contents
guaranty
insurance underwriters,inc., discover property& casualty insurance company, discover specialty insurance company and united states fidelity and guaranty company.
(b)the
following affiliated companies are 100% reinsured by one of the pool participants noted in (a)above: fidelity and guaranty insurance company,
gulf underwriters insurance company, american equity insurance company, select insurance company, st.paul fire and casualty insurance company, the travelers lloyds insurance company and
travelers lloyds of texas insurance company. in addition, at december31, 2008, seaboard surety company, an affiliated company, was 90% reinsured by the travelers indemnity company, one of the
pool participants noted in (a)above. effective january1, 2009, seaboard surety company was merged into travelers c&sco. of america.
debt ratings
the following table summarizes the current debt, preferred stock and commercial paper ratings of the company and its subsidiaries as of
february19, 2009. the table also presents the position of each rating in the applicable agency's rating scale.
a.m. best
moody's
s&p
fitch
senior debt
a- (7thof 22)
a2 (6thof 21)
a- (7thof 22)
a (6thof 24)
subordinated debt
bbb+ (8thof 22)
a3 (7thof 21)
bbb+ (8thof 22)
a- (7thof 24)
junior subordinated debt
bbb (9thof 22)
a3 (7thof 21)
bbb (9thof 22)
a- (7thof 24)
trust preferred securities
bbb (9thof 22)
a3 (7thof 21)
bbb (9thof 22)
a- (7thof 24)
preferred stock
bbb (9thof 22)
baa1 (8thof 21)
bbb (9thof 22)
commercial paper
amb-1 (2ndof 6)
p-1 (1stof 3)
a-2 (3rdof 10)
f-1 (2ndof 7)
rating agency actions
the following rating agency actions were taken with respect to the company in 2008 and through february19,
2009:
on march17, 2008, fitch affirmed all ratings for the company. the outlook remained stable.
on may7, 2008,a.m. best affirmed the financial strength rating of "a" for travelers guarantee company of
canada. the outlook is stable.
on june3, 2008,a.m. best affirmed all of its ratings for the company's debt, preferred stock and
commercial paper listed in the foregoing table. concurrently,a.m. best affirmed the financial strength ratings of the travelers reinsurance pool, travelers c&s company of america, first
floridian auto and home insurance company, first trenton indemnity company, the premier insurance company of massachusetts and travelers c&s company of europe,ltd. listed in the foregoing
table. the outlook is stable.
on june6, 2008, moody's upgraded the ratings of the company (senior unsecured debt to "a2" from "a3," commercial
paper to "p-1" from "p-2") and its subsidiaries (including travelers indemnity company and its pooled or otherwise supported affiliatesinsurance financial strength
to "aa2" from "aa3"). the outlook is stable.
on august14, 2008, standard& poor's affirmed the financial strength rating of "3-" for
travelers syndicate management limitedsyndicate 5000. the outlook is stable.
on november17, 2008,a.m. best affirmed the financial strength rating of "a" for travelers insurance
company limited. the outlook remains stable.
on february13, 2009, fitch affirmed all ratings for the company. the outlook remained stable.
table of contents
investment operations
a significant majority of funds available for investment are deployed in a widely diversified portfolio of high quality, liquid
intermediate-term taxable u.s. government bonds, tax-exempt u.s. municipal bonds, and taxable corporate and u.s. agency mortgage-backed bonds. the company closely monitors the
duration of its fixed maturity investments, and investment purchases and sales are executed with the objective of having adequate funds available to satisfy the company's insurance and debt
obligations. the company's management of the duration of the fixed income investment portfolio generally produces a duration that modestly exceeds the estimated duration of the company's net insurance
liabilities.
the
primary goals of the company's asset liability management process are to satisfy the insurance liabilities, manage the interest rate risk embedded in those insurance liabilities and
maintain sufficient liquidity to cover fluctuations in projected liability cash flows. generally, the expected principal and interest payments produced by the company's fixed income portfolio
adequately fund the estimated runoff of the company's insurance reserves. although this is not an exact cash flow match in each period, the substantial degree by which the market value of the fixed
income portfolio exceeds the present value of the net insurance liabilities, plus the positive cash flow from newly sold policies and the large amount of high quality liquid bonds provides assurance
of the company's ability to fund the payment of claims without having to sell illiquid assets or access credit facilities.
the
company also invests much smaller amounts in equity securities, venture capital (through direct ownership and limited partnerships), private equity limited partnerships, joint
ventures, real estate and real estate partnerships, hedge funds, mortgage loans and trading securities. these investment classes have the potential for higher returns but also involve varying degrees
of risk, including less stable rates of return and less liquidity.
see
note3 of notes to the company's consolidated financial statements for additional information regarding the company's investment portfolio.
derivatives
see notes1 and 3 of notes to the company's consolidated financial statements for a discussion of the policies and transactions
related to the company's derivative financial instruments.
regulation
state and federal regulation
trv's insurance subsidiaries are subject to regulation in the various states and jurisdictions in which they transact business. the
extent of regulation varies, but generally derives from statutes that delegate regulatory, supervisory and administrative authority to a department of insurance in each state. the regulation,
supervision and administration relate, among other things, to standards of solvency that must be met and maintained, the licensing of insurers and their agents, the nature of and limitations on
investments, premium rates, restrictions on the size of risks that may be insured under a single policy, reserves and provisions for unearned premiums, losses and other obligations, deposits of
securities for the benefit of policyholders, approval of policy forms and the regulation of market conduct, including the use of credit information in underwriting as well as other underwriting and
claims practices. in addition, many states have enacted variations of competitive ratemaking laws, which allow insurers to set certain premium rates for certain classes of insurance without having to
obtain the prior approval of the state insurance department. state insurance departments also conduct periodic examinations of the financial condition and market conduct of insurance companies and
require the filing of financial and other reports on a quarterly and annual basis. trv's insurance subsidiaries are collectively licensed to
table of contents
transact
insurance business in all u.s. states, the district of columbia, guam, puerto rico, bermuda and the u.s. virgin islands.
insurance regulation concerning dividends.trv's principal insurance subsidiaries are domiciled in the states of connecticut and
minnesota. the
insurance holding company laws of both states applicable to trv's subsidiaries require notice to, and approval by, the state insurance commissioner for the declaration or payment of any dividend, that
together with other distributions made within the preceding twelve months, exceeds the greater of 10% of the insurer's capital and surplus as of the preceding december31, or the insurer's net
income for the twelve-month period ending the preceding december31, in each case determined in accordance with statutory accounting practices and by state regulation. this declaration or
payment is further limited by adjusted unassigned surplus, as determined in accordance with statutory accounting practices.
the
insurance holding company laws of other states in which trv's insurance subsidiaries are domiciled generally contain similar, although in some instances somewhat more restrictive,
limitations on the payment of dividends.
rate and rule approvals.trv's insurance subsidiaries are subject to each state's laws and regulations
regarding rate and rule approvals. the applicable laws and regulations are used by states to establish standards to ensure that rates are not excessive, inadequate, unfairly discriminatory, or used to
engage in unfair price competition. an insurer's ability to increase rates and the relative timing of the process are dependent upon each respective state's requirements.
requirements for exiting geographic markets and/or canceling or nonrenewing policies.several states have laws and regulations which may
impact the
timing and/or the ability of an insurer to either discontinue or substantially reduce its writings in that state. these laws and regulations typically require prior notice, and in some instances
insurance department approval, prior to discontinuing a line of business or withdrawing from that state, and they allow insurers to cancel or non-renew certain policies only for certain
specified reasons.
assessments for guaranty funds and second-injury funds and other mandatory pooling and reinsurance arrangements.virtually all states
require
insurers licensed to do business in their state, including trv's insurance subsidiaries, to bear a portion of the loss suffered by some claimants because of the insolvency of other insurers. many
states also have laws that established second-injury funds to provide compensation to injured employees for aggravation of a prior condition or injury.
trv's
insurance subsidiaries are also required to participate in various involuntary assigned risk pools, principally involving workers' compensation, automobile insurance, property
windpools in states prone to property damage from hurricanes, and fair plans, which provide various insurance coverages to individuals or other entities that otherwise are unable to purchase that
coverage in the voluntary market.
assessments
may include any charge mandated by statute or regulatory authority that is related directly or indirectly to underwriting activities. examples of such mechanisms include, but
are not limited to, the florida hurricane catastrophe fund, florida citizens property insurance corporation, louisiana citizens property insurance corporation and the texas windstorm insurance
association. amounts payable or paid as a result of arrangements that are in substance reinsurance, including certain involuntary pools where insurers are required to assume premiums and losses from
those pools, are accounted for as reinsurance (e.g., national workers' compensation reinsurance pool). amounts related to assessments from arrangements that are not reinsurance are reported as a
component of "general and administrative expenses." for additional information concerning assessments for guaranty funds and second-injury funds and other mandatory pooling and reinsurance agreements
including state-funding mechanisms, see "item1arisk factors."
table of contents
insurance regulatory information system.the national association of insurance commissioners (naic) developed the insurance regulatory
information
system (iris) to help state regulators identify companies that may require special attention. financial examiners review annual statements and key financial ratios based on year-end data.
these ratios assist state insurance departments in executing their statutory mandate to oversee the financial condition of insurance companies. each ratio has an established "usual range" of results.
a ratio result falling outside the usual range of iris ratios, however, is not considered a failing result; rather, unusual values are viewed as part of the regulatory early monitoring system.
furthermore, in some years, it may not be unusual for financially sound companies to have several ratios with results outside the usual ranges. generally, an insurance company will become subject to
regulatory scrutiny if it falls outside the usual ranges of four or more of the ratios.
based
on preliminary 2008 iris ratios calculated by the company, the travelers indemnity company and the standard fire insurance company had results outside the normal range on one iris
ratio, due to the amount of dividends received from their respective subsidiaries. travelers casualty and surety company of america had results outside the normal range for one iris ratio due to
reduced dividends paid to its parent company in 2008. first trenton indemnity company had results outside the normal range for two iris ratios due to increased dividends paid to its parent company in
2008. travelers auto insuranceco. of new jersey had results outside the normal range for one iris ratio due to the receipt of a capital contribution from its parent company. several additional
companies had results outside the normal range for one iris ratio due to increased direct written premiums in these companies. in 2007, st.paul mercury insurance company had results outside
the normal range on four of the iris ratios, and st.paul guardian insurance company had results outside the normal range on three of the iris ratios. these results were due to these companies
becoming travelers reinsurance pool participants in 2007. previously, these companies had been 100% reinsured by the travelers indemnity company, one of the travelers reinsurance pool participants. in
conjunction with their new participation, st.paul mercury insurance company and st.paul guardian insurance company received capital contributions of $30million and
$10million, respectively, from their parent company, st.paul fire and marine insurance company, in 2007.
management
does not anticipate regulatory action as a result of the 2008 iris ratio results. in all instances in prior years, regulators have been satisfied upon follow-up
that no regulatory action was required. it is possible that similar results could occur in the future.
risk-based capital (rbc) requirements.the naic has an rbc requirement for most property and casualty insurance companies. the rbc
requirement determines minimum capital
requirements and is intended to raise the level of protection for policyholder obligations. under laws adopted by individual states, insurers having total adjusted capital less than that required by
the rbc calculation will be subject to varying degrees of regulatory action, depending on the level of capital inadequacy.
the
formulas have not been designed to differentiate among adequately capitalized companies that operate with higher levels of capital. therefore, it is inappropriate and ineffective to
use the formulas to rate or to rank these companies. at december31, 2008, all of trv's insurance subsidiaries had total adjusted capital in excess of the rbc requirement.
investment regulation.insurance company investments must comply with applicable laws and regulations which prescribe the kind, quality
and
concentration of investments. in general, these laws and regulations permit investments in federal, state and municipal obligations, corporate bonds, preferred and common equity securities, mortgage
loans, real estate and certain other investments, subject to specified limits and certain other qualifications. at december31, 2008, the company was in compliance with these laws and
regulations.
agent and broker compensation.as part of industry-wide investigations, the company received subpoenas and written requests for
information from a number of regulators. the areas of pending inquiry addressed to the company include the method by which brokers and agents are compensated.
table of contents
the
company cooperated with these subpoenas and requests for information. the company has also entered into agreements with several of these regulators to resolve issues related to broker and agent
compensation. as a result of these agreements, the company has discontinued paying contingent commissions in the united states on a number of insurance businesses, including excess casualty and
umbrella, personal insurance, boiler and machinery, financial guaranty, fidelity and burglary& theft. the company has developed alternative compensation arrangements for these lines of
business that compensate brokers and agents in a manner that differentiates for business performance and is consistent with all applicable laws. beginning january1, 2007, the company offered
an optional fixed commission program in the u.s. for most commercial insurance lines.
international regulation
trv's insurance underwriting subsidiaries based in the united kingdom, travelers insurance company limited and travelers casualty and
surety company of europe limited, are regulated by the financial services authority (fsa). the fsa's principal objectives are to maintain market confidence, promote public understanding of the
financial system, protect consumers, and fight financial crime. trv's managing agent (travelers syndicate managementltd.) of its lloyd's syndicate is also regulated by the fsa, which has
delegated certain regulatory responsibilities to the council of lloyd's.
through
lloyd's, trv is licensed to write business in over 70 countries throughout the world by virtue of lloyd's international licenses. in each such country, trv is subject to the laws
and insurance regulation of that country. in 2007, a trv subsidiary, travelers casualty and surety company, established a representative office in china. the representative office is regulated by the
china insurance regulatory commission. in addition, in 2007, trv's lloyd's managing operations agency established a service company in singapore, the underwriting operations of which are regulated by
the monetary authority of singapore.
trv's
insurance operations in the republic of ireland are regulated by the irish financial services regulatory authority. in canada, the conduct of trv's insurance business is regulated
by the office of the superintendent of financial institutions under provisions of the insurance companies act, which requires insurance companies to maintain certain levels of capital depending on the
type and amount of insurance policies in force.
trv's
branch in runoff in australia is regulated by the australian prudential regulation authority.
insurance holding company statutes
as a holding company, trv is not regulated as an insurance company. however, since trv owns capital stock in insurance subsidiaries, it
is subject to state insurance holding company statutes, as well as certain other laws, of each of its insurance subsidiaries' states of domicile. all holding company statutes, as well as other laws,
require disclosure and, in some instances, prior approval of material transactions between an insurance company and an affiliate. the holding company statutes and other laws also require, among other
things, prior approval of an acquisition of control of a domestic insurer, some transactions between affiliates and the payment of extraordinary dividends or distributions.
insurance regulations concerning change of control.many state insurance regulatory laws contain provisions that require advance
approval by state
agencies of any change in control of an insurance company that is domiciled, or, in some cases, having substantial business that it is deemed to be commercially domiciled, in that state.
the
laws of many states also contain provisions requiring pre-notification to state agencies prior to any change in control of a non-domestic insurance company
admitted to transact business in that state. while these pre-notification statutes do not authorize the state agency to disapprove the change of control, they do authorize issuance of
cease and desist orders with respect to the non-domestic insurer if it is determined that some conditions, such as undue market concentration, would result from the acquisition.
table of contents
any
transactions that would constitute a change in control of any of trv's insurance subsidiaries would generally require prior approval by the insurance departments of the states in
which the insurance subsidiaries are domiciled or commercially domiciled. they may also require pre-acquisition notification in those states that have adopted pre-acquisition
notification provisions and in which such insurance subsidiaries are admitted to transact business.
one
of trv's insurance subsidiaries and its operations at lloyd's are domiciled in the united kingdom. insurers in the united kingdom are subject to change of control restrictions in the
financial services and markets act of 2000 including approval of the financial services authority. some of trv's other insurance subsidiaries are domiciled in, or authorized to conduct insurance
business in, canada. authorized insurers in canada are subject to change of control restrictions in section407 of the insurance companies act, including approval of the office of the
superintendent of financial institutions.
these
requirements may deter, delay or prevent transactions affecting the control of or the ownership of common stock, including transactions that could be advantageous to trv's
shareholders.
enterprise risk management
as a large property casualty insurance enterprise, the company is exposed to many risks. these risks are a function of the environments
within which the company operates. since certain risks can be correlated with other risks, an event or a series of events can impact multiple areas of the company simultaneously and have a material
effect on the company's results of operations, financial position or liquidity. these exposures require an entity-wide view of risk and an understanding of the potential impact on all
aspects of the company. it also requires the company to manage its risk-taking to be within its risk appetite in a prudent effort to create and preserve value for all of the company's
constituents. this approach to company-wide risk evaluation and management is commonly called enterprise risk management (erm). erm activities involve both the identification and
assessment of a broad range of risks and the development of plans to effectively manage such risks.
erm
at the company has been operational for many years and incorporates risk-based analytics, reporting and feedback among the various disciplines throughout the company,
including, but not limited to, the underwriting, claim, reinsurance, investment, legal, regulatory, actuarial, finance and technology functions. board oversight of erm is provided by the risk
committee. in addition to the day-to-day risk management activities within the company's business units, other key internal risk management functions include the management
committee (comprised of the company's chief executive officer and the other most senior members of management), the risk committee of management, the credit committee, the chief compliance officer,
the business conduct officer, the corporate actuarial group, the internal audit group, the accounting policy group, the enterprise underwriting group and many others.
a
senior executive oversees the erm process. the mission of this executive is to facilitate risk assessment and to collaborate in implementing risk management strategies. another
strategic erm objective includes working across the company to enhance effective and realistic risk modeling capabilities as part of the company's overall effort to understand and manage its portfolio
of risks to be within its risk appetite.
the
company's erm efforts build upon its foundation of internal control. erm expands the internal control objectives of effective and efficient operations, reliable financial reporting
and compliance with applicable laws and regulations, to fostering, leading and supporting an integrated, risk-based culture within the company that focuses on value creation and
preservation. however, internal control systems and erm can provide only reasonable, not absolute, assurance that the control system's objectives will be met. further, the design of any control system
must reflect the fact that there are resource constraints, and the benefits of controls must be considered relative to their costs. as a result, the possibility of material financial loss remains in
spite of the company's significant risk management efforts. an investor should carefully consider the risks and all of the other information set
table of contents
forth
in this annual report, including the discussions included in "item1arisk factors," "item7aquantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk,"
and "item8financial statements and supplementary data."
other information
customer concentration
in the opinion of the company's management, no material part of the business of the company and its subsidiaries is dependent upon a
single customer or group of customers, the loss of any one of which would have a material adverse effect on the company, and no one customer or group of affiliated customers accounts for 10% or more
of the company's consolidated revenues.
employees
at december31, 2008, the company had approximately 33,000 employees. the company believes that its employee relations are
satisfactory. none of the company's employees are subject to collective bargaining agreements.
sources of liquidity
for a discussion of the company's sources of funds and maturities of the long-term debt of the company, see
"item7management's discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operationsliquidity and capital resources," and note8 of notes to the
company's consolidated financial statements.
taxation
for a discussion of tax matters affecting the company and its operations, see note11 of notes to the company's consolidated
financial statements.
financial information about reportable business segments
for financial information regarding reportable business segments of the company, see "item7management's discussion
and analysis of financial condition and results of operations," and note2 of notes to the company's consolidated financial statements.
recent transactions
for information regarding recent transactions of the company, see "item7management's discussion and analysis of
financial condition and results of operations."
company website and availability of sec filings
the company's internet website is www.travelers.com. information on the company's
website is not incorporated by reference herein and is not a part of this form10-k. the company makes available free of charge on its website or provides a link on its website to
the company's annual report on form10-k, quarterly reports on form10-q and current reports on form8-k, and any amendments to those reports
filed or furnished pursuant to section13(a) or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934, as soon as reasonably practicable after those reports are electronically filed with, or furnished
to, the sec. to access these filings, go to the company's website, then click on "sec filings" under the "investors" heading.
from
time to time, the company may use its website as a channel of distribution of material company information. financial and other material information regarding the company is
routinely posted on and accessible at http://investor.travelers.com. in addition, you may automatically receive e-mail alerts and other information about the company by enrolling your
e-mail address by visiting the "e-mail alert service" section at http://investor.travelers.com.
table of contents
glossary of selected insurance terms
accident year
the annual calendar accounting period in which loss events occurred, regardless of when the losses are actually reported, booked or paid.
adjusted unassigned surplus
unassigned surplus as of the most recent statutory annual report reduced by twenty-five percent of that year's
unrealized appreciation in value or revaluation of assets or unrealized profits on investments, as defined in that report.
admitted insurer
a company licensed to transact insurance business within a state.
annuity
a contract that pays a periodic benefit over the remaining life of a person (the annuitant), the lives of two or
more persons or for a specified period of time.
assigned risk pools
reinsurance pools which cover risks for those unable to purchase insurance in the voluntary market. possible
reasons for this inability include the risk being too great or the profit being too small under the required insurance rate structure. the costs of the risks associated with these pools are charged back to insurance carriers in proportion to their
direct writings.
assumed reinsurance
insurance risks acquired from a ceding company.
average value analysis
an actuarial method used to estimate ultimate losses for a given cohort of claims such as an accident
year/product line component. if the paid-to-date losses are then subtracted from the estimated ultimate losses, the result is an indication of the unpaid losses.
the basic premise of the method is that average claim values are stable and predictable over time for a
particular cohort of claims. the method is utilized most often where ultimate claim counts are known or reliably estimable fairly early after the start of an accident year and average values are expected to be fairly predictable from one year to the
next.
ultimate losses under the method equal the known or estimated ultimate claim counts times the estimated average
value. estimated ultimate claim counts are frequently based on a claim count development method, essentially the same as the paid and case incurred development methods mentioned elsewhere in this glossary but using claim count rather than claim
dollar data. the average values can be based on historical trends from past closed claims, or backed into from estimated ultimate losses divided by estimated ultimate claim counts, or some other approach. when the average values are calculated from
ultimate loss estimates, the resulting estimated averages may be supplemented with other data/analyses.
bornhuetter-ferguson method
an actuarial method to estimate ultimate losses for a given cohort of claims such as an accident year/product
line component. if the paid-to-date losses are then subtracted from the estimated ultimate losses, the result is an indication of the outstanding losses.
table of contents
the basic premise of the method is that the historical ratio of additional claim activity to earned premium for a given product
line component/age-to-age period is stable and predictable. it implicitly assumes that the actual activity to date for past periods for that cohort is not a credible predictor of future activity for that cohort, or at least is not credible enough to
override the "a priori" assumption as to future activity. it may be applied to either paid or case incurred claim data. it is used most often where the claim data is sparse and/or volatile and for relatively young cohorts with low volumes and/or data
credibility.
to illustrate, the method may assume that the ratio of additional paid losses from the 12 to 24month period
for an accident year is 10% of the original "a priori" expected losses for that accident year. the original "a priori" expected losses are typically based on the original loss ratio assumption for that accident year, with subsequent adjustment as
facts develop.
the ultimate losses equal actual activity to date plus the expected values for future periods.
broker
one who negotiates contracts of insurance or reinsurance on behalf of an insured party, receiving a commission
from the insurer or reinsurer for placement and other services rendered.
capacity
the percentage of surplus, or the dollar amount of exposure, that an insurer or reinsurer is willing or able to
place at risk. capacity may apply to a single risk, a program, a line of business or an entire book of business. capacity may be constrained by legal restrictions, corporate restrictions or indirect restrictions.
captive
a closely-held insurance company whose primary purpose is to provide insurance coverage to the company's owners
or their affiliates.
case-incurred development method
an actuarial method to estimate ultimate losses for a given cohort of claims such as an accident year/product
line component. if the paid-to-date losses are then subtracted from the estimated ultimate losses, the result is an indication of the unpaid losses.
the approach is the same as that described in this glossary under the "paid loss development method," but based
on the growth in cumulative case-incurred losses (i.e.,the sum of claim-adjustor incurred estimates for claims in the cohort) rather than paid losses. the basic premise of the method is that cumulative case incurred losses for a given cohort of
claims will grow in a stable, predictable pattern from year-to-year, based on the age of the cohort.
case reserves
claim department estimates of anticipated future payments to be made on each specific individual reported
claim.
table of contents
casualty insurance
insurance which is primarily concerned with the losses caused by injuries to third persons, i.e.,not the insured, and the
legal liability imposed on the insured resulting therefrom. it includes, but is not limited to, employers' liability, workers' compensation, public liability, automobile liability, personal liability and aviation liability insurance. it excludes
certain types of losses that by law or custom are considered as being exclusively within the scope of other types of insurance, such as fire or marine.
catastrophe
a severe loss, resulting from natural and man-made events, including risks such as fire, earthquake, windstorm,
explosion, terrorism and other similar events. each catastrophe has unique characteristics. catastrophes are not predictable as to timing or amount in advance, and therefore, their effects are not included in earnings or claims and claim adjustment
expense reserves prior to occurrence. a catastrophe may also result in the payment of reinstatement premiums and assessments from various pools.
catastrophe loss
loss and directly identified loss adjustment expenses from catastrophes.
catastrophe reinsurance
a form of excess of loss reinsurance which, subject to a specified limit, indemnifies the ceding company for the
amount of loss in excess of a specified retention with respect to an accumulation of losses resulting from a catastrophic event. the actual reinsurance document is called a "catastrophe cover." these reinsurance contracts are typically designed to
cover property insurance losses but can be written to cover casualty insurance losses such as from workers' compensation policies.
cede; ceding company
when an insurer reinsures its liability with another insurer or a "cession," it "cedes" business and is referred
to as the "ceding company."
ceded reinsurance
insurance risks transferred to another company as reinsurance. see "reinsurance."
claim
request by an insured for indemnification by an insurance company for loss incurred from an insured
peril.
claim adjustment expenses
see "loss adjustment expenses (lae)."
claims and claim adjustment expenses
see "loss" and "loss adjustment expenses (lae)."
claims and claim adjustment expense reserves
see "loss reserves."
cohort
a group of items or individuals that share a particular statistical or demographic characteristic. for example,
all claims for a given product in a given market for a given accident year would represent a cohort of claims.
table of contents
combined ratio
the sum of the loss and lae ratio, the underwriting expense ratio and, where applicable, the ratio of dividends to policyholders
to net premiums earned. a combined ratio under 100% generally indicates an underwriting profit. a combined ratio over 100% generally indicates an underwriting loss.
commercial multi-peril policies
refers to policies which cover both property and third-party liability exposures.
commutation agreement
an agreement between a reinsurer and a ceding company whereby the reinsurer pays an agreed-upon amount in
exchange for a complete discharge of all obligations, including future obligations, between the parties for reinsurance losses incurred.
deductible
the amount of loss that an insured retains.
deferred acquisition costs
primarily commissions and premium-related taxes that vary with, and are primarily related to, the production of
new contracts and are deferred and amortized to achieve a matching of revenues and expenses when reported in financial statements prepared in accordance with u.s. generally accepted accounting principles (gaap).
deficiency
with regard to reserves for a given liability, a deficiency exists when it is estimated or determined that the
reserves are insufficient to pay the ultimate settlement value of the related liabilities. where the deficiency is the result of an estimate, the estimated amount of deficiency (or even the finding of whether or not a deficiency exists) may change as
new information becomes available.
demand surge
significant short-term increases in building material and labor costs due to a sharp increase in demand for those
materials and services, commonly as a result of a large catastrophe resulting in significant widespread property damage.
direct written premiums
the amounts charged by an insurer to insureds in exchange for coverages provided in accordance with the terms of
an insurance contract. the amounts exclude the impact of all reinsurance premiums, either assumed or ceded.
earned premiums or premiums earned
that portion of property casualty premiums written that applies to the expired portion of the policy term. earned
premiums are recognized as revenues under both statutory accounting practices (sap) and gaap.
excess liability
additional casualty coverage above a layer of insurance exposures.
excess of loss reinsurance
reinsurance that indemnifies the reinsured against all or a specified portion of losses over a specified dollar
amount or "retention."
expense ratio
see "underwriting expense ratio."
facultative reinsurance
the reinsurance of all or a portion of the insurance provided by a single policy. each policy reinsured is
separately negotiated.
table of contents
fair access to insurance requirements (fair) plan
a residual market mechanism which provides property insurance to those unable to obtain such insurance through the regular
(voluntary) market. fair plans are set up on a state-by-state basis to cover only those risks in that state. for more information, see "residual market (involuntary business)."
fidelity and surety programs
fidelity insurance coverage protects an insured for loss due to embezzlement or misappropriation of funds by an
employee. surety is a three-party agreement in which the insurer agrees to pay a second party or make complete an obligation in response to the default, acts or omissions of an insured.
ground-up analysis
a method to estimate ultimate claim costs for a given cohort of claims such as an accident year/product line
component. it involves analyzing the exposure at an individual insured level and then through the use of deterministic or stochastic scenarios and/or simulations, estimating the ultimate losses for those insureds. the total losses for the cohort are
then the sum of the losses for each individual insured.
in practice, the method is sometimes simplified by performing the individual insured analysis only for the larger
insureds, with the costs for the smaller insureds estimated via sampling approaches (extrapolated to the rest of the smaller insured population) or aggregate approaches (using assumptions consistent with the ground-up larger insured
analysis).
guaranteed cost products
an insurance policy where the premiums charged will not be adjusted for actual loss experience during the covered
period.
guaranty fund
a state-regulated mechanism that is financed by assessing insurers doing business in those states. should
insolvencies occur, these funds are available to meet some or all of the insolvent insurer's obligations to policyholders.
incurred but not reported (ibnr) reserves
reserves for estimated losses and lae that have been incurred but not yet reported to the insurer. this includes
amounts for unreported claims, development on known cases, and re-opened claims.
inland marine
a broad type of insurance generally covering articles that may be transported from one place to another, as well
as bridges, tunnels and other instrumentalities of transportation. it includes goods in transit, generally other than transoceanic, and may include policies for movable objects such as personal effects, personal property, jewelry, furs, fine art and
others.
iris ratios
financial ratios calculated by the naic to assist state insurance departments in monitoring the financial
condition of insurance companies.
table of contents
large deductible policy
an insurance policy where the customer assumes at least $25,000 or more of each loss. typically, the insurer is responsible for
paying the entire loss under those policies and then seeks reimbursement from the insured for the deductible amount.
lloyd's
an insurance marketplace based in london, england, where brokers, representing clients with insurable risks, deal
with lloyd's underwriters, who represent investors. the investors are grouped together into syndicates that provide capital to insure the risks.
loss
an occurrence that is the basis for submission and/or payment of a claim. losses may be covered, limited or
excluded from coverage, depending on the terms of the policy.
loss adjustment expenses (lae)
the expenses of settling claims, including legal and other fees and the portion of general expenses allocated to
claim settlement costs.
loss and lae ratio
for sap, it is the ratio of incurred losses and loss adjustment expenses to net earned premiums. for gaap, it is
the ratio of incurred losses and loss adjustment expenses reduced by an allocation of fee income to net earned premiums.
loss reserves
liabilities established by insurers and reinsurers to reflect the estimated cost of claims incurred that the
insurer or reinsurer will ultimately be required to pay in respect of insurance or reinsurance it has written. reserves are established for losses and for lae, and consist of case reserves and ibnr reserves. as the term is used in this document,
"loss reserves" is meant to include reserves for both losses and lae.
loss reserve development
the increase or decrease in incurred claims and claim adjustment expenses as a result of the re-estimation of
claims and claim adjustment expense reserves at successive valuation dates for a given group of claims. loss reserve development may be related to prior year or current year development.
losses incurred
the total losses sustained by an insurance company under a policy or policies, whether paid or unpaid. incurred
losses include a provision for ibnr.
national association of insurance commissioners (naic)
an organization of the insurance commissioners or directors of all 50 states, the district of columbia and the
five u.s. territories organized to promote consistency of regulatory practice and statutory accounting standards throughout the united states.
net written premiums
direct written premiums plus assumed reinsurance premiums less premiums ceded to reinsurers.
operating income (loss)
net income (loss) excluding the after-tax impact of net realized investment gains (losses), discontinued
operations and cumulative effect of changes in accounting principles when applicable.
table of contents
operating income (loss) per share
operating income (loss) on a per share basis.
operating return on equity
the ratio of operating income to average equity excluding net unrealized investment gains and losses and
discontinued operations, net of tax.
paid development method
an actuarial method to estimate ultimate losses for a given cohort of claims such as an accident year/product
line component. if the paid-to-date losses are then subtracted from the estimated ultimate losses, the result is an indication of the unpaid losses.
the basic premise of the method is that cumulative paid losses for a given cohort of claims will grow in a stable,
predictable pattern from year-to-year, based on the age of the cohort. these age-to-age growth factors are sometimes called "link ratios."
for example, if cumulative paid losses for a product line xyz for accident year 2004 were $100 as of
december31, 2004 (12months after the start of that accident year), then grew to $120 as of december31, 2005 (24months after the start), the link ratio for that accident year from 12 to 24months would be 1.20. if the link
ratio for other recent accident years from 12 to 24months for that product line were also at or around 1.20, then the method would assume a similar result for the most recent accident year, i.e.,that it too would have its cumulative paid
losses grow 120% from the 12month to 24month valuation.
this is repeated for each age-to-age period into the future until the age-to-age link ratios for future periods
are assumed to be 1.0 (i.e.,the age at which cumulative losses are assumed to have stopped growing).
a given accident year's cumulative losses are then projected to ultimate by multiplying current cumulative losses
by successive age-to-age link ratios up to that future age where growth is expected to end. for example, if growth is expected to end at 60months, then the ultimate indication for an accident year with cumulative losses at 12months equals
those losses times a 12 to 24month link ratio, times a 24 to 36month link ratio, times a 36 to 48month link ratio, times a 48 to 60month link ratio.
advanced applications of the method include adjustments for changing conditions during the historical period and
anticipated changes in the future.
pool
an organization of insurers or reinsurers through which particular types of risks are underwritten with premiums,
losses and expenses being shared in agreed-upon percentages.
premiums
the amount charged during the year on policies and contracts issued, renewed or reinsured by an insurance
company.
table of contents
property insurance
insurance that provides coverage to a person or business with an insurable interest in tangible property for that person's or
business's property loss, damage or loss of use.
quota share reinsurance
reinsurance wherein the insurer cedes an agreed-upon fixed percentage of liabilities, premiums and losses for
each policy covered on a pro rata basis.
rates
amounts charged per unit of insurance.
redundancy
with regard to reserves for a given liability, a redundancy exists when it is estimated or determined that the
reserves are greater than what will be needed to pay the ultimate settlement value of the related liabilities. where the redundancy is the result of an estimate, the estimated amount of redundancy (or even the finding of whether or not a redundancy
exists) may change as new information becomes available.
reinstatement premiums
additional premiums payable to reinsurers to restore coverage limits that have been exhausted as a result of
reinsured losses under certain excess-of-loss reinsurance treaties.
reinsurance
the practice whereby one insurer, called the reinsurer, in consideration of a premium paid to that insurer,
agrees to indemnify another insurer, called the ceding company, for part or all of the liability of the ceding company under one or more policies or contracts of insurance which it has issued.
reinsurance agreement
a contract specifying the terms of a reinsurance transaction.
reported claim development method
an actuarial method to estimate ultimate claim counts for a given cohort of claims such as an accident
year/product line component. if the reported-to-date counts are then subtracted from the estimated ultimate counts, the result is an indication of the ibnr counts.
the approach is the same as that described in this glossary under the "paid loss development method", but based
on the growth in cumulative claim counts rather than paid losses. the basic premise of the method is that cumulative claim counts for a given cohort of claims will grow in a stable, predictable pattern from year-to-year, based on the age of the
cohort.
table of contents
residual market (involuntary business)
insurance market which provides coverage for risks for those unable to purchase insurance in the voluntary market. possible
reasons for this inability include the risks being too great or the profit potential too small under the required insurance rate structure. residual markets are frequently created by state legislation either because of lack of available coverage such
as: property coverage in a windstorm prone area or protection of the accident victim as in the case of workers' compensation. the costs of the residual market are usually charged back to the direct insurance carriers in proportion to the carriers'
voluntary market shares for the type of coverage involved.
retention
the amount of exposure a policyholder company retains on any one risk or group of risks. the term may apply to an
insurance policy, where the policyholder is an individual, family or business, or a reinsurance policy, where the policyholder is an insurance company.
retention rate
current period renewal premiums, accounts or policies as a percentage of total premiums, accounts or policies
available for renewal.
retrospective premiums
premiums related to retrospectively rated policies.
retrospective rating
a plan or method which permits adjustment of the final premium or commission on the basis of actual loss
experience, subject to certain minimum and maximum limits.
return on equity
the ratio of net income to average equity.
risk-based capital (rbc)
a measure adopted by the naic and enacted by states for determining the minimum statutory capital and surplus
requirements of insurers. insurers having total adjusted capital less than that required by the rbc calculation will be subject to varying degrees of regulatory action depending on the level of capital inadequacy.
risk retention group
an alternative form of insurance in which members of a similar profession or business band together to self
insure their risks.
runoff business
an operation which has been determined to be nonstrategic; includes non-renewals of in-force policies and a
cessation of writing new business, where allowed by law.
salvage
the amount of money an insurer recovers through the sale of property transferred to the insurer as a result of a
loss payment.
s-curve method
a mathematical function which depicts an initial slow change, followed by a rapid change and then ending in a
slow change again. this results in an "s" shaped line when depicted graphically. the actuarial application of these curves fit the reported data to date for a particular cohort of claims to an s-curve to project future activity for that
cohort.
table of contents
second-injury fund
the employer of an injured, impaired worker is responsible only for the workers' compensation benefit for the most recent injury;
the second-injury fund would cover the cost of any additional benefits for aggravation of a prior condition. the cost is shared by the insurance industry and self-insureds, funded through assessments to insurance companies and self-insureds based on
either premiums or losses.
self-insured retentions
that portion of the risk retained by a person for its own account.
servicing carrier
an insurance company that provides, for a fee, various services including policy issuance, claims adjusting and
customer service for insureds in a reinsurance pool.
statutory accounting practices (sap)
the practices and procedures prescribed or permitted by domiciliary state insurance regulatory authorities in the
united states for recording transactions and preparing financial statements. statutory accounting practices generally reflect a modified going concern basis of accounting.
statutory surplus
as determined under sap, the amount remaining after all liabilities, including loss reserves, are subtracted from
all admitted assets. admitted assets are assets of an insurer prescribed or permitted by a state to be recognized on the statutory balance sheet. statutory surplus is also referred to as "surplus" or "surplus as regards policyholders" for statutory
accounting purposes.
structured settlements
periodic payments to an injured person or survivor for a determined number of years or for life, typically in
settlement of a claim under a liability policy, usually funded through the purchase of an annuity.
subrogation
a principle of law incorporated in insurance policies, which enables an insurance company, after paying a claim
under a policy, to recover the amount of the loss from another person or entity who is legally liable for it.
third-party liability
a liability owed to a claimant (third party) who is not one of the two parties to the insurance contract. insured
liability claims are referred to as third-party claims.
treaty reinsurance
the reinsurance of a specified type or category of risks defined in a reinsurance agreement (a "treaty") between
a primary insurer or other reinsured and a reinsurer. typically, in treaty reinsurance, the primary insurer or reinsured is obligated to offer and the reinsurer is obligated to accept a specified portion of all that type or category of risks
originally written by the primary insurer or reinsured.
umbrella coverage
a form of insurance protection against losses in excess of amounts covered by other liability insurance policies
or amounts not covered by the usual liability policies.
unassigned surplus
the undistributed and unappropriated amount of statutory surplus.
table of contents
underwriter
an employee of an insurance company who examines, accepts or rejects risks and classifies accepted risks in order to charge an
appropriate premium for each accepted risk. the underwriter is expected to select business that will produce an average risk of loss no greater than that anticipated for the class of business.
underwriting
the insurer's or reinsurer's process of reviewing applications for insurance coverage, and the decision as to
whether to accept all or part of the coverage and determination of the applicable premiums; also refers to the acceptance of that coverage.
underwriting expense ratio
for sap, it is the ratio of underwriting expenses incurred less other income to net written premiums. for gaap,
it is the ratio of underwriting expenses incurred reduced by an allocation of fee income and billing and policy fees to net earned premiums.
underwriting gain or loss
net earned premiums and fee income less claims and claim adjustment expenses and insurance-related
expenses.
unearned premium
the portion of premiums written that is allocable to the unexpired portion of the policy term.
voluntary market
the market in which a person seeking insurance obtains coverage without the assistance of residual market
mechanisms.
wholesale broker
an independent or exclusive agent that represents both admitted and nonadmitted insurers in market areas, which
include standard, non-standard, specialty and excess and surplus lines of insurance. the wholesaler does not deal directly with the insurance consumer. the wholesaler deals with the retail agent or broker.
workers' compensation
a system (established under state and federal laws) under which employers provide insurance for benefit payments
to their employees for work-related injuries, deaths and diseases, regardless of fault.
table of contents
item1a.risk factors
you should carefully consider the following risks and all of the other information set forth in this report, including our consolidated
financial statements and the notes thereto.
catastrophe losses could materially and adversely affect our results of operations, our financial position and/or liquidity, and could adversely impact our ratings, our ability to
raise
capital and the availability and cost of reinsurance.our property and casualty insurance operations expose us to claims arising out of catastrophes. catastrophes
can be caused by various natural events, including, among others, hurricanes, windstorms, earthquakes, hail, severe winter weather, wildfires and volcanic eruptions. catastrophes can also be
man-made, such as a terrorist attack (including those involving nuclear, biological, chemical or radiological events) or a consequence of war or political instability. the geographic
distribution of our business subjects us to catastrophe exposures, which
include, but are not limited to: hurricanes from maine through texas; tornadoes throughout the central united states and southeast; earthquakes in california, the new madrid region and the pacific
northwest region of the united states and canada; and wildfires, particularly in the southwest.
the
incidence and severity of catastrophes are inherently unpredictable. some scientists believe that in recent years, changing climate conditions have added to the unpredictability and
frequency of natural disasters (including, but not limited to, hurricanes, tornadoes, other storms and fires) in certain parts of the world and created additional uncertainty as to future trends and
exposures. for example, in recent years hurricane activity has impacted areas further inland than previously experienced, thus expanding our overall hurricane exposure. it is possible that both the
frequency and severity of natural and man-made catastrophic events could increase. the catastrophe modeling tools that we use to help manage certain of our catastrophe exposures are based
on assumptions and judgments that are subject to error and mis-estimation and may produce estimates that are materially different than actual results. our expansion into new geographical
areas as well as changing climate conditions could cause our catastrophe models to be even less predictive, thus limiting our ability to effectively manage such exposures. see
"item7management's discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operationscatastrophe modeling."
the
extent of losses from a catastrophe is a function of both the total amount of insured exposure in the area affected by the event and the severity of the event. states have from time
to time passed legislation, and regulators have taken action, that has the effect of limiting the ability of insurers to manage catastrophe risk, such as legislation prohibiting insurers from reducing
exposures or withdrawing from catastrophe-prone areas or mandating that insurers participate in residual markets. participation in residual market mechanisms has resulted in, and may continue to
result in, significant losses or assessments to insurers, including us, and, in certain states, those losses or assessments may not be commensurate with our catastrophe exposure in those states. if
our competitors leave those states having residual market mechanisms, remaining insurers, including us, may be subject to significant increases in losses or assessments following a catastrophe. in
addition, following catastrophes, there are sometimes legislative initiatives and court decisions which seek to expand insurance coverage for catastrophe claims beyond the original intent of the
policies. also, our ability to increase pricing to the extent necessary to offset rising costs of catastrophes, particularly in the personal insurance segment, requires approval of regulatory
authorities of certain states. our ability or our willingness to manage our catastrophe exposure by raising prices, modifying underwriting terms or reducing exposure to certain geographies may be
limited due to considerations of public policy, the evolving political environment, changes in the general economic climate and/or social responsibilities. we also may choose to write business in
catastrophe-prone areas that we might not otherwise write for strategic purposes, such as improving our access to other underwriting opportunities.
there
are also risks that impact the estimation of ultimate costs for catastrophes. for example, the estimation of reserves related to hurricanes can be affected by the inability to
access portions of the
table of contents
impacted
areas, the complexity of factors contributing to the losses, the legal and regulatory uncertainties and the nature of the information available to establish the reserves. complex factors
include, but are not limited to: determining whether damage was caused by flooding versus wind;
evaluating general liability and pollution exposures; estimating additional living expenses; the impact of demand surge; infrastructure disruption; fraud; the effect of mold damage; business
interruption costs; and reinsurance collectibility. the timing of a catastrophe's occurrence, such as at or near the end of a reporting period, can also affect the information available to us in
estimating reserves for that reporting period. the estimates related to catastrophes are adjusted as actual claims emerge and additional information becomes available.
catastrophe
losses could materially and adversely affect our results of operations for any fiscal quarter or year and may materially harm our financial position, which in turn could
adversely affect our financial strength and claims-paying ratings and could impair our ability to raise capital on acceptable terms or at all. also, as a result of our exposure to catastrophe losses
or following a catastrophe, rating agencies may further increase their capital requirements, which may require us to raise capital to maintain our ratings or adversely affect our ratings. a ratings
downgrade could hurt our ability to compete effectively or attract new business. in addition, catastrophic events could cause us to exhaust our available reinsurance limits and could adversely impact
the cost and availability of reinsurance. such events can also impact the credit of our reinsurers. for a discussion of our catastrophe reinsurance coverage, see
"itemibusinessreinsurancecatastrophe reinsurance." catastrophic events could also adversely impact the credit of the issuers of securities, such as
states or municipalities, in whom we have invested, which could materially and adversely affect our results of operations and financial position.
in
addition to catastrophe losses, the accumulation of losses from smaller weather-related events in any fiscal quarter or year could materially and adversely impact our results of
operations in those periods.
given
the unpredictable frequency and severity of terrorism losses, as well as the limited terrorism coverage in our own reinsurance program, future losses from acts of terrorism,
particularly those involving nuclear, biological, chemical or radiological events, could materially and adversely affect our results of operations, financial position and/or liquidity. although the
terrorism risk insurance program reauthorization act of 2007 provides benefits in the event of certain acts of terrorism, those benefits are subject to a deductible and other limitations. under this
law, once our losses exceed 20% of our commercial property and casualty insurance premium for the preceding calendar year, the federal government will reimburse us for 85% of our losses attributable
to certain acts of terrorism which exceed this deductible up to a total industry program cap of $100billion. in addition, because this law is relatively new and its interpretation is untested,
there may be uncertainty as to how it will be applied to specific circumstances.
because
of the risks set forth above, catastrophes such as those caused by various natural events, or man-made events such as a terrorist attack (including those involving
nuclear, biological, chemical or radiological events), could materially and adversely affect our results of operations, financial position and/or liquidity.
financial disruption or a prolonged economic downturn may materially and adversely affect our business.worldwide financial markets
have recently
experienced significant disruption, resulting in heightened credit risk, reduced valuation of investments and decreased economic activity. moreover, many companies are experiencing reduced liquidity
and uncertainty as to their ability to raise capital. in the event that these conditions persist or result in a prolonged economic downturn, our results of operations, financial position and/or
liquidity could be materially and adversely affected. in addition, as a result of recent financial events, we may face increased regulation. many of the risk factors that follow identify risks that
result from, or are exacerbated by, financial disruption or a prolonged
table of contents
economic
downturn. these include risks discussed below related to our investment portfolio, reinsurance arrangements, other credit exposures, emerging claim and coverage issues, the competitive
environment, regulatory developments and the impact of rating agency actions. you should also refer to "item7management's discussion and analysis of financial condition and
results of operation", particularly the "outlook" section.
our investment portfolio may suffer reduced returns or material losses.investment returns are an important part of our overall
profitability.
fixed
maturity and short-term investments comprised approximately 94% of the carrying value of our investment portfolio as of december31, 2008. changes in interest
rates (inclusive of credit spreads) affect the carrying value of our fixed maturity investments and returns on our fixed maturity and short-term investments. a decline in interest rates
reduces the returns available on new investments, thereby negatively impacting our net investment income. conversely, rising interest rates reduces the market value of existing fixed maturity
investments.
we
invest a portion of our assets in equity securities, private equity limited partnerships, hedge funds, real estate partnerships, joint ventures, venture capital investments, directly
owned real estate and trading securities, all of which are subject to greater volatility in their investment returns than fixed maturity investments. general economic conditions, changes in applicable
tax laws and many other factors beyond our control can adversely affect the value of our non-fixed maturity investments and the realization of net investment income, and/or result in
realized investment losses, as well as the level of returns available from such investments in the future. as a result of these factors, we may realize reduced returns on these investments, we may
incur losses on sales of these investments and we may be required to write down the value of these investments, which could reduce our net investment income and result in realized investment losses.
during
an economic downturn, our investment portfolio could be subject to higher risk. the value of our investment portfolio is subject to the risk that certain investments may default
or become impaired
due to a deterioration in the financial condition of one or more issuers of the securities held in our portfolio, or due to a deterioration in the financial condition of an insurer that guarantees an
issuer's payments of such investments. such defaults and impairments could reduce our net investment income and result in realized investment losses.
our
investment portfolio is also subject to increased valuation uncertainties when investment markets are illiquid. the valuation of investments is more subjective when markets are
illiquid, thereby increasing the risk that the estimated fair value (i.e.,the carrying amount) of the portion of the investment portfolio that is carried at fair value as reflected in our
financial statements is not reflective of prices at which actual transactions would occur.
our
fixed maturity investment portfolio is invested, in substantial part, in obligations of states, municipalities, and political subdivisions (collectively referred to as the municipal
bond portfolio). notwithstanding the relatively low historical rates of default on many of these obligations, during an economic downturn, our municipal bond portfolio could be subject to a higher
risk of default or impairment due to declining municipal tax bases and revenue. our portfolio has also benefited from tax exemptions and certain other tax laws, including, but not limited to, those
governing dividends-received deductions and tax credits (such as foreign tax credits). federal and/or state tax legislation could be enacted in connection with deficit reduction or various types of
fundamental tax reform that would lessen or eliminate some or all of the tax advantages currently benefiting us and could adversely affect the value of our investment portfolio.
because
of the risks set forth above, the value of our investment portfolio could decrease, we could experience reduced net investment income, and we could incur realized investment
losses, which could materially and adversely affect our results of operations, financial position and/or liquidity.
table of contents
we may not be able to collect all amounts due to us from reinsurers, and reinsurance coverage may not be available to us in the future at commercially reasonable rates or at
all.the availability and cost of reinsurance are subject to prevailing market conditions, both in terms of price and available capacity, which can affect our
business volume and profitability. the availability of reinsurance capacity can be impacted by general economic conditions and conditions in the reinsurance market, such as the occurrence of
significant reinsured events. in particular in 2009, we expect there may be a significant capacity shortage with regard to catastrophe reinsurance, which could adversely impact the cost and
availability of reinsurance to us.
although
the reinsurer is liable to us to the extent of the ceded reinsurance, we remain liable as the direct insurer on all risks reinsured. as a result, ceded reinsurance arrangements
do not eliminate our obligation to pay claims. accordingly, we are subject to credit risk with respect to our ability to recover amounts due from reinsurers.
in
the past, certain reinsurers have ceased writing business and entered into runoff. some of our reinsurance claims may be disputed by the reinsurers, and we may ultimately receive
partial or no payment. this is a particular risk in the case of claims that relate to insurance policies written many years ago, including those relating to asbestos and environmental claims. in
addition, in a number of jurisdictions, particularly the european union and the united kingdom, a reinsurer is permitted to transfer a reinsurance arrangement to another reinsurer, which may be less
creditworthy, without a counterparty's consent, provided that the transfer has been approved by the applicable regulatory and/or court authority. the ability of reinsurers to transfer their risks to
other, less creditworthy reinsurers may adversely impact our ability to collect amounts due to us.
included
in reinsurance recoverables are certain amounts related to structured settlements. structured settlements comprise annuities purchased from various life insurance companies to
settle certain personal physical injury claims, of which workers' compensation claims comprise a significant portion. in cases where we did not receive a release from the claimant, the structured
settlement is included in reinsurance recoverables as we retain the contingent liability to the claimant. in the event that the life insurance company fails to make the required annuity payments, we
would be required to make such payments.
many
reinsurance companies and life insurance companies have been negatively impacted by deteriorating financial and economic conditions, including unprecedented financial market
disruption. a number of these companies, including those with which we conduct business, have been downgraded and/or have been placed on negative outlook by various rating agencies.
because
of the risks set forth above, we may not be able to collect all amounts due to us from reinsurers, and reinsurance coverage may not be available to us in the future at
commercially reasonable rates or at all, and/or life insurance companies may fail to make required annuity payments, and thus our results of operations and financial condition could be materially and
adversely affected.
we are exposed to credit risk in certain of our business operations.in addition to exposure to credit risk related to our investment
portfolio and
reinsurance recoverables discussed above, we are exposed to credit risk in several other areas of our business operations, including credit risk relating to policyholders, independent agents and
brokers.
we
are exposed to credit risk in our surety insurance operations, where we guarantee to a third party that our customer will satisfy certain performance obligations (e.g.,a
construction contract) or certain financial obligations. if our customer defaults, we may suffer losses and be unable to be reimbursed by our customer.
in
addition, a portion of our business is written with large deductible insurance policies. under workers' compensation insurance contracts with deductible features, we are obligated to
pay the
table of contents
claimant
the full amount of the claim. we are subsequently reimbursed by the contractholder for the deductible amount and, as a result, we are exposed to credit risk to the policyholder. moreover,
certain policyholders purchase retrospectively rated workers' compensation policies (i.e.,policies in which premiums are adjusted after the policy period based on the actual loss experience of
the policyholder during the policy period). retrospectively rated policies expose us to additional credit risk to the extent that the adjusted premium is greater than the original premium.
in
accordance with industry practice, when policyholders purchase insurance policies from us through independent agents and brokers, the premiums relating to those policies are often
paid to the agents and brokers for payment to us. in most jurisdictions, the premiums will be deemed to have been paid to us whether or not they are actually received by us. consequently, we assume a
degree of credit risk associated with amounts due from independent agents and brokers.
to
a large degree, the credit risk we face is a function of the economy; accordingly, we face a greater risk in an economic downturn. while we attempt to manage the risks discussed above
through underwriting and investment guidelines, collateral requirements and other oversight mechanisms, our efforts may not be successful. for example, collateral obtained may subsequently have little
or no value. as a result, our exposure to the above credit risks could materially and adversely affect our results of operations and financial condition.
if actual claims exceed our loss reserves, or if changes in the estimated level of loss reserves are necessary, our financial results could be materially and adversely
affected.claims and claim adjustment expense reserves (loss reserves) represent management's estimate of ultimate unpaid costs of losses and loss adjustment
expenses for claims that have been reported and claims that have been incurred but not yet reported. loss reserves do not represent an exact calculation of liability, but instead represent management
estimates, generally utilizing actuarial expertise and projection techniques, at a given accounting date. these loss reserve estimates are expectations of what the ultimate settlement and
administration of claims will cost upon final resolution in the future, based on our assessment of facts and circumstances then known, reviews of historical settlement patterns, estimates of trends in
claims severity and frequency, expected interpretations of legal theories of liability and other factors. in establishing reserves, we also take into account estimated recoveries from reinsurance,
salvage and subrogation.
the
process of estimating loss reserves involves a high degree of judgment and is subject to a number of variables. these variables can be affected by both internal and external events,
such as changes in claims handling procedures; adverse changes in loss cost trends, including inflationary pressures in medical costs and auto and home repair costs; general economic conditions; legal
trends and legislative changes; and varying judgments and viewpoints of the individuals involved in the estimation process, among others. the impact of many of these items on ultimate costs for claims
and claim adjustment expenses is difficult to estimate. loss reserve estimation difficulties also differ significantly by product line due to differences in claim complexity, the volume of claims, the
potential severity of individual claims, the determination of occurrence date for a claim and reporting lags (the time between the occurrence of the policyholder event and when it is actually reported
to the insurer). the estimation of loss reserves may also be more difficult during times of adverse economic conditions due to unexpected changes in behavior of claimants and policyholders, including
an increase in fraudulent reporting of exposures and/or losses, reduced maintenance of insured properties or increased frequency of small claims.
we
continually refine our loss reserve estimates in a regular, ongoing process as historical loss experience develops and additional claims are reported and settled. informed judgment is
applied throughout the process, including the application of various individual experiences and expertise to multiple sets of data and analyses. different experts may choose different assumptions when
faced with material uncertainty, based on their individual backgrounds, professional experiences and areas of
table of contents
focus.
hence, such experts may at times produce estimates materially different from each other. this risk may be exacerbated in the context of an acquisition. experts providing input to the various
estimates and underlying assumptions include actuaries, underwriters, claim personnel and lawyers, as well as other company management. therefore, management may have to consider varying individual
viewpoints as part of its estimation of loss reserves.
we
attempt to consider all significant facts and circumstances known at the time loss reserves are established. due to the inherent uncertainty underlying loss reserve estimates, the
final resolution of the estimated liability for claims and claim adjustment expenses will likely be higher or lower than the related loss reserves at the reporting date. therefore, actual paid losses
in the future may yield a materially different amount than is currently reserved.
because
of the uncertainties set forth above, additional liabilities resulting from one insured event, or an accumulation of insured events, may exceed the current related reserves. in
addition, our estimate of claims and claim adjustment expenses may change. these additional liabilities or increases in estimates, or a range of either, cannot now be reasonably estimated and could
materially and adversely affect our results of operations.
for
a discussion of claims and claim adjustment expense reserves by product line, including examples of common factors that can affect required reserves, see
"item7management's discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operationscritical accounting estimatesclaims and claim adjustment
expense reserves."
our business could be harmed because of our potential exposure to asbestos and environmental claims and related litigation.
asbestos claims.we believe that the property and casualty insurance industry has suffered from court decisions and other trends
that have attempted
to expand insurance coverage for asbestos claims far beyond the intent of insurers and policyholders. while we have experienced a decrease in asbestos claims over the past several years, we continue
to receive a significant number of asbestos claims from our policyholders (which includes others seeking coverage under a policy), including claims against our policyholders by individuals who do not
appear to be impaired by asbestos exposure. factors underlying these claim filings include intensive advertising by lawyers seeking asbestos claimants and the focus by plaintiffs on previously
peripheral defendants. the focus on these defendants is primarily the result of the number of traditional asbestos defendants who have sought bankruptcy protection in previous years. in addition to
contributing to the overall number of claims, bankruptcy proceedings may increase the volatility of asbestos-related losses by initially delaying the reporting of claims and later by significantly
accelerating and increasing loss payments by insurers, including us. bankruptcy proceedings have also caused increased settlement demands against those policyholders who are not in bankruptcy but who
remain in the tort system. currently, in many jurisdictions, those who allege very serious injury and who can present credible medical evidence of their injuries are receiving priority trial settings
in the courts, while those who have not shown any credible disease manifestation are having their hearing dates delayed or placed on an inactive docket. this trend of prioritizing claims involving
credible evidence of injuries, along with the focus on defendants previously considered peripheral, contributes to the claims and claim adjustment expense payments we have experienced. in addition,
our asbestos-related claims and claim adjustment expense experience is impacted by the unavailability of other insurance sources potentially available to policyholders, whether through the exhaustion
of policy limits or insolvency.
we
continue to be involved in coverage litigation concerning a number of policyholders, some of whom have filed for bankruptcy, who in some instances have asserted that all or a portion
of their asbestos-related claims are not subject to aggregate limits on coverage. in these instances, policyholders also may assert that each individual bodily injury claim should be treated as a
separate occurrence under the policy. it is difficult to predict whether these policyholders will be successful on both issues.
table of contents
to
the extent both issues are resolved in a policyholder's favor and our other defenses are not successful, our coverage obligations under the policies at issue would be materially increased and
bounded only by the applicable per-occurrence limits and the number of asbestos bodily
injury claims against the policyholder. accordingly, it remains difficult to predict the ultimate cost of these claims.
many
coverage disputes with policyholders are only resolved through settlement agreements. because many policyholders make exaggerated demands, it is difficult to predict the outcome of
settlement negotiations. settlements involving bankrupt policyholders may include extensive releases which are favorable to us but which could result in settlements for larger amounts than originally
anticipated. there also may be instances where a court may not approve a proposed settlement, which may result in additional litigation and potentially less beneficial outcomes for us. as in the past,
we will continue to pursue settlement opportunities.
in
addition to claims against policyholders, proceedings have been launched directly against insurers, including us, by individuals challenging insurers' conduct with respect to the
handling of past asbestos claims and by individuals seeking damages arising from alleged asbestos-related bodily injuries. we anticipate the filing of other direct actions against insurers, including
us, in the future. it is difficult to predict the outcome of these proceedings, including whether the plaintiffs will be able to sustain these actions against insurers based on novel legal theories of
liability.
environmental claims.we continue to receive claims from policyholders who allege that they are liable for injury or damage
arising out of their
alleged disposition of toxic substances. mostly, these claims are due to various legislative as well as regulatory efforts aimed at environmental remediation. for instance, the comprehensive
environmental response, compensation and liability act (cercla), enacted in 1980 and later modified, enables private parties as well as federal and state governments to take action with respect to
releases and threatened releases of hazardous substances. this federal statute permits the recovery of response costs from some liable parties and may require liable parties to undertake their own
remedial action. liability under cercla may be joint and several with other responsible parties.
we
have been, and continue to be, involved in litigation involving insurance coverage issues pertaining to environmental claims. we believe that some court decisions have interpreted the
insurance coverage to be broader than the original intent of the insurers and policyholders. these decisions often pertain to insurance policies that were issued by us prior to the
mid-1980s. these decisions continue to be inconsistent and vary from jurisdiction to jurisdiction. environmental claims when submitted rarely indicate the monetary amount being sought by
the claimant from the policyholder, and we do not track the monetary amounts being sought in those few claims which indicate a monetary amount.
asbestos and environmental claims.uncertainties surrounding the final resolution of asbestos and environmental claims continue,
and it is difficult
to determine the ultimate exposure for these claims and related litigation. as a result, these reserves are subject to revision as new information becomes available and as claims develop. the
continuing uncertainties include, without limitation, the risks and lack of predictability inherent in complex litigation, any impact from the bankruptcy protection sought by various asbestos
producers and other asbestos defendants, a further increase or decrease in asbestos and environmental claims beyond that which is anticipated, the role of any umbrella or excess policies we have
issued, the resolution or adjudication of some disputes pertaining to the amount of available coverage for asbestos and environmental claims in a manner inconsistent with our previous assessment of
these claims, the number and outcome of direct actions against us and future developments pertaining to our ability to recover reinsurance for asbestos and environmental claims. it is also not
possible to predict changes in the legal and legislative environment and their impact on the future development of asbestos and environmental claims. this development will be affected by future court
decisions and interpretations, as well as changes in applicable legislation, including legislation related to
table of contents
asbestos
reform. it is also difficult to predict the ultimate outcome of large coverage disputes until settlement negotiations near completion and significant legal questions are resolved or, failing
settlement, until the dispute is adjudicated. this is particularly the case with policyholders in bankruptcy where negotiations often involve a large number of claimants and other parties and require
court approval to be effective.
while
the ongoing evaluation of asbestos and environmental claims and associated liabilities considers the inconsistencies of court decisions as to coverage, plaintiffs' expanded
theories of liability and the risks inherent in complex litigation and other uncertainties, in the opinion of our management, it is possible that the outcome of the continued uncertainties regarding
these claims could result in liability in future periods that differs from current reserves by an amount that could materially and adversely affect our results of operations. see the "asbestos claims
and litigation" and "environmental claims and litigation" sections of "item7management's discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations." also see
"item3legal proceedings."
we are exposed to, and may face adverse developments involving, mass tort claims such as those relating to exposure to potentially harmful products or
substances.in addition to asbestos and environmental claims, we face exposure to other types of mass tort claims, including claims related to exposure to
potentially harmful products or substances, including lead paint, silica and welding rod fumes. establishing claims and claim adjustment expense reserves for mass tort claims is subject to
uncertainties because of many factors, including expanded theories of liability, disputes concerning medical causation with respect to certain diseases, geographical concentration of the lawsuits
asserting the claims and the potential for a large rise in the total number of claims without underlying epidemiological developments suggesting an increase in disease rates. moreover, evolving
judicial interpretations regarding the application of various tort theories and defenses, including application of
various theories of joint and several liabilities, as well as the application of insurance coverage to these claims, impede our ability to estimate our ultimate liability for such claims.
because
of the uncertainties set forth above, additional liabilities may arise for amounts in excess of the current related reserves. in addition, our estimate of claims and claim
adjustment expenses may change, and such change could be material. these additional liabilities or increases in estimates, or a range of either, cannot now be reasonably estimated and could materially
and adversely affect our results of operations.
the effects of emerging claim and coverage issues on our business are uncertain.as industry practices and legal, judicial, social and
other
environmental conditions change, unexpected and unintended issues related to claim and coverage may emerge. these issues may adversely affect our business by either extending coverage beyond our
underwriting intent or by increasing the number or size of claims. examples of emerging claims and coverage issues include, but are not limited to:
judicial expansion of policy coverage and the impact of new theories of liability;
plaintiffs targeting property and casualty insurers, including us, in purported class action litigation relating to
claims-handling and other practices;
claims relating to construction defects, which often present complex coverage and damage valuation questions;
claims under directors'& officers' insurance policies relating to: losses from involvement in financial market
activities, such as mortgage or financial product origination, distribution or structuring; fraud, including those related to investment management businesses; possible accounting irregularities; and
corporate governance issues;
the assertion of "public nuisance" theories of liability, pursuant to which plaintiffs seek to recover monies spent to
administer public health care programs and/or to abate hazards to public health and safety; and
table of contents
medical developments that link health issues to particular causes, resulting in liability claims.
in
some instances, these emerging issues may not become apparent for some time after we have issued the affected insurance policies. as a result, the full extent of liability under our
insurance policies may not be known for many years after the policies are issued.
in
addition, the potential passage of new legislation designed to expand the right to sue, to remove limitations on recovery, to extend the statutes of limitations or otherwise to repeal
or weaken tort reforms could have an adverse impact on our business. in particular, recent shifts in the political landscape could increase the likelihood of the passing of such legislation in a
number of states.
the
effects of these and other unforeseen emerging claim and coverage issues are extremely hard to predict and could harm our business and materially and adversely affect our results of
operations.
the intense competition that we face could harm our ability to maintain or increase our business volumes and our profitability.the
property and
casualty insurance industry is highly competitive, and we believe that it will remain highly competitive for the foreseeable future. we compete with both domestic and foreign insurers, a number of
which are experiencing financial difficulties. competitors that are experiencing financial difficulties may offer products at prices and on terms that are not consistent with our economic standards in
an effort to maintain their business. the competitive environment in which we operate could also be impacted by current general economic conditions, which could reduce the volume of business available
to us, as well as to our competitors. also, competitors that receive financial support from the federal government may have advantages that are not available to other market participants. see
"item7management's discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operationoutlook."
our
competitive position is based on many factors, including but not limited to our:
ability to retain existing customers, to obtain new business and to profitably price our business;
agent, broker and client relationships;
speed of claims payment;
premiums charged, contract terms and conditions, products and services offered (including the ability to design customized
programs);
perceived overall financial strength and corresponding ratings assigned by independent rating agencies;
reputation, experience and qualifications of employees;
geographic scope of business;
local presence; and
ability to keep pace relative to our competitors with changes in technology and information systems.
we
may have difficulty in continuing to compete successfully on any of these bases in the future. if competition limits our ability to retain existing business or write new business at
adequate rates, our results of operations could be materially and adversely affected. see "competition" sections of the discussion on business segments in "item 1business."
the insurance industry and we are the subject of a number of investigations by state and federal authorities in the united states. we cannot predict the outcome of these
investigations
or the impact on our business practices or financial results.as part of industry-wide investigations, we have
table of contents
received
subpoenas and written requests for information from a number of government agencies and authorities, including, among others, state attorneys general, state insurance departments, the u.s.
attorney for the southern district of new york and the u.s. securities and exchange commission (sec). the areas of pending inquiry addressed to us include our relationship with brokers and agents and
our involvement with "non-traditional" insurance and reinsurance products. we may receive additional subpoenas and requests for information with respect to these matters. for further
information, see "item3legal proceedings".
it
would be premature to reach any conclusions as to the likely outcome of these matters or the impact on our business or financial results. potential outcomes could include enforcement
proceedings or settlements resulting in fines, penalties and/or changes in business practices that could materially and
adversely affect our results of operations. in addition, these investigations may result in changes in laws and regulations affecting the industry in general which could, in turn, also materially and
adversely affect our results of operations.
our businesses are heavily regulated and changes in regulation may reduce our profitability and limit our growth.we are extensively
regulated and
supervised in the jurisdictions in which we conduct business, including licensing and supervision by governmental regulatory agencies in such jurisdictions.
this
regulatory system is generally designed to protect the interests of policyholders, and not necessarily the interests of insurers, their shareholders and other investors. for
example, to protect policyholders whose insurance company becomes financially insolvent, guaranty funds have been established in all fifty states to pay the covered claims of policyholders in the
event of an insolvency of an insurer. the funding of guaranty funds is provided through assessments levied against remaining insurers in the marketplace. as a result, the insolvency of one or more
insurance companies could result in additional assessments levied against us.
this
regulatory system also addresses authorization for lines of business, capital and surplus requirements, limitations on the types and amounts of certain investments, underwriting
limitations, transactions with affiliates, dividend limitations, changes in control, premium rates and a variety of other financial and non-financial components of an insurer's business.
in
recent years, the state insurance regulatory framework has come under increased federal scrutiny, and some state legislatures have considered or enacted laws that may alter or
increase state authority to regulate insurance companies and insurance holding companies. further, the national association of insurance commissioners (naic) and state insurance regulators continually
reexamine existing laws and regulations, specifically focusing on modifications to holding company regulations, interpretations of existing laws and the development of new laws and regulations. in
addition, congress and some federal agencies from time to time investigate the current condition of insurance regulation in the united states to determine whether to impose federal or national
regulation or to allow an optional federal charter, similar to the option available to most banks. in the future, additional federal regulation may be enacted which could impact the ways in which we
conduct our business and could result in higher compliance costs. we cannot predict the effect any proposed or future legislation or naic initiatives may have on the conduct of our business or results
of operations.
although
the united states federal government does not currently directly regulate the insurance business, changes in federal legislation, regulation and/or administrative policies in
several areas, including changes in financial services regulation (e.g.,the repeal of the mccarran-ferguson act) and federal taxation, can significantly harm the insurance industry, including
us. a number of proposals being considered by the u.s. congress, if they became law, would give the federal government an increased role in insurance regulation, including supervisory authority over
the holding company.
further,
in a time of financial uncertainty or a prolonged economic downturn, regulators may choose to adopt more restrictive insurance laws and regulations. for example, insurance
regulators may
table of contents
choose
to restrict the ability of insurance subsidiaries to make payments to their parent companies or reject rate increases due to the economic environment.
insurance
laws or regulations that are adopted or amended may be more restrictive than current laws or regulations and may result in lower revenues and/or higher costs of compliance and
thus could materially and adversely affect our results of operations and limit our growth.
a downgrade in our claims-paying and financial strength ratings could adversely impact our business volumes, adversely impact our ability to access the capital markets and increase
our
borrowing costs.claims-paying and financial strength ratings have become increasingly important to an insurer's competitive position. rating agencies review
insurers' ratings periodically, and change their ratings criteria periodically, and therefore our current ratings may not be maintained in the future. a downgrade in one or more of our ratings could
negatively impact our business volumes because demand for certain of our products may be reduced, particularly because many customers may require that we maintain minimum ratings to enter into or
renew business with us. additionally, we may find it more difficult to access the capital markets and we may incur higher borrowing costs. if significant losses, such as those resulting from one or
more major catastrophes, or significant reserve additions or significant investment impairments were to cause our capital position to deteriorate significantly, or if one or more rating agencies
substantially increase their capital requirements, we may need to raise equity capital in the future (which we may not be able to do at a reasonable cost or at all) in order to maintain our ratings or
limit the extent of a downgrade. a continued trend of more frequent and severe weather-related catastrophes or a prolonged economic downturn may lead rating agencies to substantially increase their
capital requirements. for further discussion about our ratings, see, "item1businessratings."
the inability of our insurance subsidiaries to pay dividends to our holding company in sufficient amounts would harm our ability to meet our obligations and to pay future shareholder
dividends.our holding company relies on dividends from our insurance subsidiaries to meet our obligations for payment of interest and principal on outstanding
debt obligations and to pay dividends to shareholders and corporate expenses. the ability of our insurance subsidiaries to pay dividends to us in the future will depend on their statutory surplus,
earnings and regulatory restrictions.
we
are subject to regulation by some states as an insurance holding company system. our insurance subsidiaries are subject to various regulatory restrictions that limit the maximum
amount of dividends
available to be paid to their parent without prior approval of insurance regulatory authorities. in a time of prolonged economic downturn, regulators may choose to further restrict the ability of
insurance subsidiaries to make payments to their parent companies. the ability of our insurance subsidiaries to pay dividends to our holding company is also restricted by regulations that set
standards of solvency that must be met and maintained. the inability of our insurance subsidiaries to pay dividends to our holding company in an amount sufficient to meet our debt service obligations
and other cash requirements could harm our ability to meet our obligations and to pay future shareholder dividends.
disruptions to our relationships with our independent agents and brokers could adversely affect us.we market our insurance products
primarily
through independent agents and brokers. an important part of our business is written through less than a dozen such intermediaries. loss of all or a substantial portion of the business provided
through such agents and brokers could materially and adversely affect our future business volume and results of operations.
we
rely on internet applications for the marketing and sale of certain of our products, and we may increasingly rely on internet applications and toll-free numbers for
distribution. in some instances, our agents and brokers are required to access separate business platforms to execute the sale of our personal insurance or commercial insurance products. should
internet disruptions occur, or frustration
table of contents
with
our business platforms or distribution initiatives develop among our independent agents and brokers, the resulting loss of business could materially and adversely affect our future business
volume and results of operations.
loss of or significant restriction on the use of credit scoring in the pricing and underwriting of personal insurance products could reduce our future
profitability.in personal insurance, we use credit scoring as a factor in pricing decisions where allowed by state law. some consumer groups and regulators have
questioned whether the use of credit scoring unfairly discriminates against people with low incomes, minority groups and the elderly and are calling for the prohibition or restriction on the use of
credit scoring in underwriting and pricing. in august of 2008, for example, the michigan court of appeals ruled to allow state regulators to prohibit insurers from using customers' credit scores to
determine home and auto insurance rates. laws or regulations that significantly curtail the use of credit scoring, if enacted in a large number of states, could adversely affect our future
profitability.
we are subject to a number of risks associated with our business outside the united states.we conduct business outside the united
states primarily
in the united kingdom, canada and ireland. we have also
started to explore opportunities in other countries, including in emerging markets such as india and china. while our business outside of the united states currently constitutes a relatively small
portion of our revenues, in conducting such business we are subject to a number of significant risks, particularly in emerging economies. these risks include restrictions such as price controls,
capital controls, exchange controls and other restrictive governmental actions, which could have an adverse effect on our business and our reputation. in addition, some countries, particularly
emerging economies, have laws and regulations that lack clarity and, even with local expertise and effective controls, it can be difficult to determine the exact requirements of the local laws.
failure to comply with local laws in a particular market could have a significant and negative effect not only on our business in that market but also on our reputation generally.
we could be adversely affected if our controls to ensure compliance with guidelines, policies and legal and regulatory standards are not
effective.our business is highly dependent on our ability to engage on a daily basis in a large number of insurance underwriting, claim processing and investment
activities, many of which are highly complex. these activities often are subject to internal guidelines and policies, as well as legal and regulatory standards. a control system, no matter how well
designed and operated, can provide only reasonable assurance that the control system's objectives will be met. if our controls are not effective, it could lead to financial loss, unanticipated risk
exposure (including underwriting, credit and investment risk) or damage to our reputation.
our business success and profitability depend, in part, on effective information technology systems and on continuing to develop and implement improvements in
technology.we depend in large part on our technology systems for conducting business and processing claims, and thus our business success is dependent on
maintaining the effectiveness of existing technology systems and on continuing to develop and enhance technology systems that support our business processes and strategic initiatives in a cost and
resource efficient manner. some system development projects are long-term in nature, may negatively impact our expense ratios as we invest in the projects and may cost more than we expect
to complete. they also may not deliver the benefits we expect once they are complete. if we do not effectively and efficiently manage and upgrade our technology portfolio, or if the costs of doing so
are higher than we expect, our ability to provide competitive services to new and existing customers in a cost effective manner and our ability to implement our strategic initiatives could be
adversely impacted.
if we experience difficulties with technology, data security and/or outsourcing relationships our ability to conduct our business could be negatively
impacted.while technology can streamline many business processes and ultimately reduce the cost of operations, technology initiatives present certain risks. our
business is highly dependent upon our employees' ability to perform, in an efficient and
table of contents
uninterrupted
fashion, necessary business functions. a shut-down of, or inability to, access one or more of our facilities, a power outage or a failure of one or more of our information
technology, telecommunications or other systems could significantly impair our ability to perform such functions on a timely basis. in addition, because our information technology and
telecommunications systems interface with and depend on third-party systems, we could experience service denials if demand for such service exceeds capacity or a third-party system fails or
experiences an interruption. if sustained or repeated, such a business interruption, system failure or service denial could result in a deterioration of our ability to write and process new and
renewal business, provide customer service, pay claims in a timely manner or perform other necessary business functions. computer viruses, hackers and other external hazards could expose our data
systems to security breaches. these increased risks, and expanding regulatory requirements regarding data security, could expose us to data loss, monetary and reputational damages and significant
increases in compliance costs. as a result, our ability to conduct our business might be adversely affected.
we
outsource certain technology and business process functions to third parties and may do so increasingly in the future. if we do not effectively develop and implement our outsourcing
strategy, third party providers do not perform as anticipated or we experience technological or other problems with a transition, we may not realize productivity improvements or cost efficiencies and
may experience operational difficulties, increased costs and a loss of business. our outsourcing of certain technology and business process functions to third parties may expose us to enhanced risk
related to data security, which could result in monetary and reputational damages. in addition, our ability to receive services from third party providers outside of the united states might be
impacted by cultural differences, political instability, unanticipated regulatory requirements or policies inside or outside of the united states. as a result, our ability to conduct our business
might be adversely affected.
acquisitions and integration of acquired businesses may result in operating difficulties and other unintended consequences.from time to
time we may
investigate and pursue acquisition opportunities if we believe that such opportunity is consistent with our long-term objectives and that the potential rewards of the acquisition exceed
the risks. the process of integrating an acquired company or business can be complex and costly, however, and may create unforeseen operating difficulties and expenditures. for example, acquisitions
may present significant risks, including:
the potential disruption of our ongoing business;
the ineffective integration of underwriting, claims handling and actuarial practices;
the increase in the inherent uncertainty of reserve estimates for a period of time, until stable trends reestablish
themselves within the combined organization, as past trends (that were a function of past products, past claims handling procedures, past claims departments and past legal and other experts) may not
repeat themselves;
the diversion of management time and resources to acquisition integration challenges;
the loss of key employees; and
the cultural challenges associated with integrating employees.
there
is no guarantee that any businesses acquired in the future will be successfully integrated, and the ineffective integration of our businesses and processes may result in
substantial costs or delays and adversely affect our ability to compete. also, the acquired business may not perform as projected, and any cost savings and other synergies anticipated from the
acquisition may not materialize.
table of contents
item1b.unresolved staff comments
on july23, 2004, the company announced that it was seeking guidance from the staff of the division of corporation finance of
the sec with respect to the appropriate purchase accounting treatment for certain second quarter 2004 adjustments totaling $1.63billion ($1.07billion after-tax). the
company recorded these adjustments as charges in its consolidated statement of income in the second quarter of 2004. through an informal comment process, the staff of the division of corporation
finance subsequently asked for further information, which the company provided. specifically, the staff asked for information concerning the company's adjustments to certain of spc's insurance
reserves and reserves for reinsurance recoverables and premiums due from policyholders, and how those adjustments may relate to spc's reserves for periods prior to the merger of spc and tpc. after
reviewing the staff's questions and comments and discussions with the company's independent auditors, the company continues to believe that its accounting treatment for these adjustments is
appropriate. if, however, the staff disagrees, some or all of the adjustments being considered may not be recorded as charges in the company's consolidated statement of income, thereby increasing net
income for the second quarter and full year 2004 and increasing shareholders' equity at december31, 2008, 2007, 2006, 2005 and 2004, in each case by the approximate after-tax
amount of the change. the effect on tangible shareholders' equity (adjusted for the effects of deferred taxes associated with goodwill and other intangible assets) at december31, 2008, 2007,
2006, 2005 and 2004 would not be material. increases to goodwill and deferred tax liabilities would be reflected on the company's balance sheet at april1, 2004, either due to purchase
accounting or adjustment of spc's reserves prior to the merger of spc and tpc. on may3, 2006, the company received a letter from the division of enforcement of the sec (the division) advising
the company that it is conducting an inquiry relating to the second quarter 2004 adjustments and the april1, 2004 merger between spc and tpc. the company cooperated with the division's
requests for information.
item2.properties
the company leases its principal executive offices in new york, new york, as well as 191 field and claim offices totaling approximately
5.3million square feet throughout the united states under leases or subleases with third parties. the company owns six buildings in hartford, connecticut. the company currently occupies
approximately 1.8million square feet of office space in these buildings. the company also owns office buildings located at 385washington street and 130west sixth street,
st.paul, minnesota. these buildings are adjacent to one another and consist of approximately 1.1million square feet of gross floor space. the company also owns other real property,
including office buildings in denver, colorado and fall river, massachusetts, as well as a data center located in norcross, georgia.
the
company owns a building in london, england, which houses a portion of its operations in the united kingdom.
the
company, through its subsidiaries, owns an investment portfolio of income-producing properties and real estate funds. included in this portfolio are four office buildings in which
the company holds a 50% ownership interest located in new york, new york, which collectively accounted for approximately 10% of the carrying value of the property portfolio at december31,
2008.
in
the opinion of the company's management, the company's properties are adequate and suitable for its business as presently conducted and are adequately maintained.
table of contents
item3.legal proceedings
this section describes the major pending legal proceedings, other than ordinary routine litigation incidental to the business, to which
the company or any of its subsidiaries is a party or to which any of the company's property is subject.
asbestos- and environmental-related proceedings
in the ordinary course of its insurance business, the company receives claims for insurance arising under policies issued by the
company asserting alleged injuries and damages from asbestos- and environmental-related exposures that are the subject of related coverage litigation, including, among others, the litigation described
below. the company continues to be subject to aggressive asbestos-related litigation. the conditions surrounding the final resolution of these claims and the related litigation continue to change. the
company is defending its asbestos- and environmental-related litigation vigorously and believes that it has meritorious defenses; however, the outcomes of these disputes are uncertain. in this regard,
the company employs dedicated specialists and aggressive resolution strategies to manage asbestos and environmental loss exposure, including settling litigation under appropriate circumstances. for a
discussion of other information regarding the company's asbestos and environmental exposure, see "partiiitem7management's discussion and analysis of financial
condition and results of operationsasbestos claims and litigation," "environmental claims and litigation" and "uncertainty regarding adequacy of asbestos and
environmental reserves."
in
october 2001 and april 2002, two purported class action suits (wise v. travelers and meninger v.
travelers) were filed against tpc and other insurers (not including spc) in state court in west virginia. these and other cases subsequently filed in west virginia were
consolidated into a single proceeding in the circuit court of kanawha county, west virginia. the plaintiffs allege that the insurer defendants engaged in unfair trade practices by inappropriately
handling and settling asbestos claims. the plaintiffs seek to reopen large numbers of settled asbestos claims and to impose liability for damages, including punitive damages, directly on insurers.
similar lawsuits were filed in massachusetts and hawaii state courts (these suits and the west virginia suits are collectively referred to as the statutory and hawaii actions).
in
march 2002, the plaintiffs in consolidated asbestos actions pending before a mass tort panel of judges in west virginia state court amended their complaint to include tpc as a
defendant, alleging that tpc and other insurers breached alleged duties to certain users of asbestos products. the plaintiffs seek damages, including punitive damages. lawsuits seeking similar relief
and raising similar allegations, primarily violations of purported common law duties to third parties, are also pending in texas state court against tpc and spc, and in louisiana state court against
tpc (the claims asserted in these suits, together with the west virginia suit, are collectively referred to as the common law claims).
the
federal bankruptcy court that had presided over the bankruptcy of tpc's former policyholder johns-manville corporation issued a temporary injunction prohibiting the prosecution of
the statutory actions (but not the hawaii actions), the common law claims and an additional set of cases filed in various state courts in texas and ohio, and enjoining certain attorneys from filing
any further lawsuits against tpc based on similar allegations. notwithstanding the injunction, additional common law claims were filed against tpc.
in
november 2003, the parties reached a settlement of the statutory and hawaii actions. this settlement includes a lump-sum payment of up to $412million by tpc,
subject to a number of significant contingencies. in may 2004, the parties reached a settlement resolving substantially all pending and similar future common law claims against tpc. this settlement
requires a payment of
table of contents
up
to $90million by tpc, subject to a number of significant contingencies. each of these settlements is contingent upon, among other things, a final order of the bankruptcy court clarifying
that all of these claims, and similar future asbestos-related claims against tpc, are barred by prior orders entered by the bankruptcy court.
on
august17, 2004, the bankruptcy court entered an order approving the settlements and clarifying its prior orders that all of the pending statutory and hawaii actions and
substantially all common law claims pending against tpc are barred. the order also applies to similar direct action claims that may be filed in the future.
on
march29, 2006, the u.s. district court for the southern district of new york substantially affirmed the bankruptcy court's orders while vacating that portion of the bankruptcy
court's orders that required all future direct actions against tpc to first be approved by the bankruptcy court before proceeding in state or federal court.
various
parties appealed the district court's march29, 2006 ruling to the u.s. court of appeals for the second circuit. on february15, 2008, the second circuit issued an
opinion vacating on jurisdictional grounds the district court's approval of an order issued by the bankruptcy court prohibiting the prosecution of the statutory and hawaii actions and the common law
claims, as well as future similar direct action litigation, against tpc. on february29, 2008, tpc and certain other parties to the appeals filed petitions for rehearing and/or rehearing  en banc,
requesting reinstatement of the district court's judgment, which were denied. tpc and certain other parties filed petitions for writ of
certiorari in the united states supreme court seeking review of the second circuit's decision, and on december12, 2008, the petitions were granted. unless the supreme court reverses the second
circuit's decision, and the bankruptcy court's order is reinstated and becomes final, the settlements will be voided, and tpc will have no obligation to pay the amounts due under the settlement
agreements (other than certain administrative expenses). in that case, the company intends to litigate the direct action cases vigorously.
spc,
which is not covered by the bankruptcy court rulings or the settlements described above, is a party to pending direct action cases in texas state court asserting common law claims.
all such cases that are still pending and in which spc has been served are currently on the inactive docket in texas state court. if any of those cases becomes active, spc intends to litigate those
cases vigorously.
currently,
it is not possible to predict legal outcomes and their impact on the future development of claims and litigation relating to asbestos and environmental claims. any such
development will be affected by future court decisions and interpretations, as well as changes in applicable legislation. because of these uncertainties, additional liabilities may arise for amounts
in excess of the current related reserves. in addition, the company's estimate of ultimate claims and claim adjustment expenses may change. these additional liabilities or increases in estimates, or a
range of either, cannot now be reasonably estimated and could result in income statement charges that could be material to the company's results of operations in future periods.
other proceedings
from time to time, the company is involved in proceedings addressing disputes with its reinsurers regarding the collection of amounts
due under the company's reinsurance agreements. these proceedings may be initiated by the company or the reinsurers and may involve the terms of the reinsurance agreements, the coverage of particular
claims, exclusions under the agreements, as well as counterclaims for rescission of the agreements. one of these disputes is the action described in the following paragraphs.
the
company's gulf operation brought an action on may22, 2003 in the supreme court of new york, county of new york (gulf insurance company v.
transatlantic reinsurance company, et al.),
table of contents
against
transatlantic reinsurance company (transatlantic), xl reinsurance america,inc. (xl), odyssey america reinsurance corporation (odyssey), employers reinsurance company (employers) and
gerling global reinsurance corporation of america (gerling), to recover amounts due under reinsurance contracts issued to gulf and related to gulf's february 2003 settlement of a coverage dispute
under a vehicle residual value protection insurance policy. the reinsurers asserted counterclaims seeking rescission of the vehicle residual value reinsurance contracts issued to gulf and unspecified
damages for breach of contract. gerling commenced a separate action asserting the same claims, which has been consolidated with the original gulf action for pre-trial purposes.
gulf
has entered into final settlement agreements with employers, xl, transatlantic and odyssey which resolve all claims between gulf and these defendants under the reinsurance
agreements at issue in the litigation.
in
november 2007, the court issued rulings denying gulf's motion for partial summary judgment against gerling, the sole remaining defendant, but granting gerling's motion for partial
summary judgment on certain claims and counterclaims asserted by gulf and gerling. gulf has appealed the court's decision to the supreme court of new york appellate division, first department, and has
been granted a stay of trial on the remaining claims pending that appeal. briefing of the appeal was completed on april11, 2008, and oral argument was held on may20, 2008. gulf denies
gerling's allegations, believes that it has a strong legal basis to collect the amounts due under the reinsurance contracts and intends to vigorously pursue the action.
based
on the company's beliefs about its legal positions in its various reinsurance recovery proceedings, the company does not expect any of these matters will have a material adverse
effect on its results of operations in a future period.
as
previously disclosed, as part of industry-wide investigations that commenced in october 2004, the company and its affiliates received subpoenas and written requests for
information from a number of government agencies and authorities, including, among others, state attorneys general, state insurance departments, the u.s. attorney for the southern district of new york
and the u.s. securities and exchange commission (sec). the areas of pending inquiry addressed to the company include its relationship with brokers and agents and the company's involvement with
"non-traditional insurance and reinsurance products." the company and its affiliates may receive additional subpoenas and requests for information with respect to these matters.
the
company cooperated with these subpoenas and requests for information. in addition, outside counsel, with the oversight of the company's board of directors, conducted an internal
review of certain of the company's business practices. this review was commenced after the announcement of litigation brought in october 2004 by the new york attorney general's office against a major
broker. the company completed its review. with respect to the identified finite products purchased and sold, the company concluded that no adjustment to previously issued financial statements was
required. any authority with open inquiries or investigations could ask that additional work be performed or reach conclusions different from the company's.
in
2005, four putative class action lawsuits were brought against a number of insurance brokers and insurers, including the company and/or certain of its affiliates, by plaintiffs who
allegedly purchased insurance products through one or more of the defendant brokers. the plaintiffs alleged that various insurance brokers conspired with each other and with various insurers,
including the company and/or certain of its affiliates, to artificially inflate premiums, allocate brokerage customers and rig bids for insurance products offered to those customers. to the extent
they were not originally filed there, the federal class actions were transferred to the u.s. district court for the district of new jersey and were consolidated for pre-trial proceedings
with other class actions under the caption in re insurance brokerage antitrust litigation. on august1, 2005, various plaintiffs, including the
four named plaintiffs
table of contents
in
the above-referenced class actions, filed an amended consolidated class action complaint naming various brokers and insurers, including the company and certain of its affiliates, on behalf of a
putative nationwide class of policyholders. the complaint included causes of action under the sherman act, the racketeer influenced and corrupt organizations act (rico), state common law and the laws
of the various states prohibiting antitrust violations. the complaint sought monetary damages, including punitive damages and trebled damages, permanent injunctive relief, restitution, including
disgorgement of profits, interest and costs, including attorneys' fees. all defendants moved to dismiss the complaint for failure to state a claim. after giving plaintiffs multiple opportunities to
replead, the court dismissed the sherman act claims on august31, 2007 and the rico claims on september28, 2007, both with prejudice, and declined to exercise supplemental jurisdiction
over the state law claims. the plaintiffs are appealing the district court's decisions to the u.s. court of appeals for the third circuit. additional individual actions have been brought in state and
federal courts against the company involving allegations similar to those in in re insurance brokerage antitrust litigation, and further actions may be
brought. the company believes that all of these lawsuits have no merit and intends to defend vigorously.
in
addition to those described above, the company is involved in numerous lawsuits, not involving asbestos and environmental claims, arising mostly in the ordinary course of business
operations, either as a liability insurer defending third-party claims brought against policyholders, or as an insurer defending claims brought against it relating to coverage or the company's
business practices. while the ultimate resolution of these legal proceedings could be material to the company's results of operations in a future period, in the opinion of the company's management,
none would likely have a material adverse effect on the company's financial position or liquidity.
the
company previously reported that it sought guidance from the division of corporation finance of the sec with respect to the appropriate purchase accounting treatment for certain
second quarter 2004 adjustments totaling $1.63billion. see "item1bunresolved staff comments." after discussion with the staff of the division of corporate finance and the
company's independent auditors, the company continues to believe that its accounting treatment for these adjustments is appropriate. on may3, 2006, the company received a letter from the
division of enforcement of the sec (the division) advising the company that it is conducting an inquiry relating to the second quarter 2004 adjustments and the april1, 2004 merger of spc and
tpc. the company cooperated with the division's requests for information.
item4.submission of matters to a vote of security holders
none.
executive officers of the registrant
information about the company's executive officers is incorporated by reference from partiii, item10 of this report.
table of contents
part ii
item5.market for registrant's common equity, related shareholder matters and issuer purchases of equity securities
the company's common stock is traded on the new york stock exchange under the symbol "trv." the number of holders of record, including
individual owners, of the company's common stock was 79,710 as of february13, 2009. this is not the actual number of beneficial owners of the company's common stock, as shares are held in
"street name" by brokers and others on behalf of individual owners. the following table sets forth the amount of cash dividends declared per share and the high and low closing sales prices of the
company's common stock for each quarter during the last two fiscal years.
high
low
cash
dividend
declared
first quarter
$
53.06
$
44.92
$
0.29
second quarter
52.15
43.40
0.30
third quarter
50.80
36.00
0.30
fourth quarter
45.20
30.50
0.30
first quarter
$
53.74
$
49.59
$
0.26
second quarter
56.76
51.85
0.29
third quarter
55.01
48.38
0.29
fourth quarter
55.18
50.05
0.29
the
company paid cash dividends per share of $1.19 in 2008 and $1.13 in 2007. future dividend decisions will be based on, and affected by, a number of factors, including the operating
results and financial requirements of the company and the impact of dividend restrictions. for information on dividends, as well as restrictions on the ability of certain of the company's subsidiaries
to transfer funds
to the company in the form of cash dividends or otherwise, see "item7management's discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operationsliquidity
and capital resources." dividends will be paid by the company only if declared by its board of directors out of funds legally available, and subject to any other restrictions that may be applicable to
the company.
table of contents
shareholder return performance graph
the following graph shows a five-year comparison of the cumulative total return for the company's common stock and the
common stock of companies included in the s&p500 index and the s&p property& casualty index, which the company believes is the most appropriate comparative index.
(1)assumes
$100 invested in common shares of the st.paul companies,inc. on december31, 2003. the performance reflected is that of the
st.paul companies,inc. only until the date of the merger (april1, 2004), and is that of the travelers companies,inc. thereafter.
(2)companies
in the s&p property-casualty index as of december31, 2008 were the following: the travelers companies,inc., the chubb corporation,
cincinnati financial corporation, progressive corporation, allstate corporation, mbia,inc. and xl capital,ltd.
returns
of each of the companies included in this index have been weighted according to their respective market capitalizations.
table of contents
issuer purchases of equity securities
the table below sets forth information regarding repurchases by the company of its common stock during the periods indicated.
period beginning
period ending
total number
of shares
purchased
average price paid
per share
total number of
shares purchased
as part of
publicly announced
plans or programs
maximum
dollar value of
shares that may
yet be purchased
under the
plans or programs
oct.1, 2008
oct.31, 2008
2,729,696
$
36.87
2,712,550
$
3,809,857,539
nov.1, 2008
nov.30, 2008
41.34
3,809,857,539
dec.1, 2008
dec.31, 2008
4,037
43.35
3,809,857,539
total
2,733,932
$
36.88
2,712,550
$
3,809,857,539
the
company repurchased 21,382 shares during this three-month period that were not part of the publicly announced share repurchase authorization, representing shares repurchased to cover
payroll withholding taxes in connection with the vesting of restricted stock awards and exercises of stock options, and shares used to cover the exercise price of certain stock options that were
exercised. the company's share repurchase authorization, which has no expiration date, was first approved and announced by the company's board of directors in may 2006. the original authorized
repurchase capacity was $2billion; in january 2007, the board of directors authorized an additional $3billion of repurchase capacity. in january 2008, the board of directors authorized
an additional $5billion for share repurchases. through december31, 2008, the company had repurchased a cumulative total of
123.9million shares for a total cost of $6.19billion and had $3.81billion of remaining capacity at december31, 2008 under the authorization.
information
relating to compensation plans under which the company's equity securities are authorized for issuance is set forth in partiiiitem12 of this
report.
table of contents
item6.selected financial data
for accounting purposes, the merger of spc and tpc in 2004 was accounted for as a reverse acquisition with tpc treated as the
accounting acquirer. accordingly, this transaction was accounted for as a purchase business combination, using tpc's historical financial information and applying fair value estimates to the acquired
assets, liabilities and commitments of spc as of april1, 2004. historical results are not necessarily indicative of results to be expected in the future.
at and for the year ended december31,(1)
(in millions, except per share amounts)
total revenues
$
24,477
$
26,017
$
25,090
$
24,365
$
22,544
income from continuing operations
$
2,924
$
4,601
$
4,208
$
2,061
$
income (loss) from discontinued operations
(439
)
net income
$
2,924
$
4,601
$
4,208
$
1,622
$
total investments
$
70,738
$
74,818
$
72,268
$
68,287
$
64,368
total assets
109,751
115,224
115,292
113,736
111,246
claims and claim adjustment expense reserves
54,723
57,700
59,288
61,090
59,070
total debt
6,181
6,242
5,760
5,850
6,313
total liabilities
84,432
88,608
90,157
91,433
90,045
total shareholders' equity
25,319
26,616
25,135
22,303
21,201
basic earnings per share:
income from continuing operations
$
4.90
$
7.04
$
6.12
$
3.04
$
1.42
income (loss) from discontinued operations(2)
(0.65
)
0.14
net income
$
4.90
$
7.04
$
6.12
$
2.39
$
1.56
diluted earnings per share:
income from continuing operations
$
4.82
$
6.86
$
5.91
$
2.95
$
1.40
income (loss) from discontinued operations(2)
(0.62
)
0.13
net income
$
4.82
$
6.86
$
5.91
$
2.33
$
1.53
year-end common shares outstanding
585.1
627.8
678.3
693.4
670.3
per common share data:
cash dividends
$
1.19
$
1.13
$
1.01
$
0.91
$
1.16
book value
$
43.12
$
42.22
$
36.86
$
31.94
$
31.35
(1)on
april1, 2004, tpc merged with spc, as a result of which tpc became a wholly-owned subsidiary of spc, and spc changed its name to the
st.paul travelers companies,inc. on february26, 2007, the name of the company was changed to the travelers companies,inc. all financial information presented herein for
the year ended december31, 2004 reflects the accounts of tpc for the three months ended march31, 2004 and the consolidated accounts of spc and tpc for the nine months ended
december31, 2004.
(2)in
august 2005, the company completed its divestiture of nuveen investments,inc., its asset management subsidiary acquired in the merger.
accordingly, the company's share of nuveen investments' results prior to the divestiture was classified as discontinued operations, along with the net after-tax loss on disposal. prior
period results were reclassified to be consistent with the 2005 presentation.
table of contents
item7.management's discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations
the following is a discussion and analysis of the financial condition and results of operations of the travelers companies,inc.
(together with its subsidiaries, the company).
2008 financial highlights
2008 consolidated results of operations
net income of $2.92billion, or $4.90 per share basic and $4.82 diluted
net earned premiums of $21.58billion
catastrophe losses of $1.41billion pretax ($919million after-tax)
net favorable prior year reserve development of $1.54billion pretax ($1.00billion after-tax)
gaap combined ratio of 91.9%
pretax net investment income of $2.79billion ($2.30billion after-tax)
net realized investment losses of $415million pretax ($271million after-tax)
2008 consolidated financial condition
total investments of $70.74billion; fixed maturities and short-term securities comprise 94% of total
investments
total assets of $109.75billion
total debt of $6.18billion, resulting in a debt to total capital ratio of 19.5%
repurchased 45.0million common shares for total cost of $2.12billion under share repurchase authorization
shareholders' equity of $25.32billion; book value per common share of $43.12
holding company liquidity of $2.15billion
consolidated overview
the company provides a wide range of property and casualty insurance products and services to businesses, government units,
associations and individuals, primarily in the united states and in selected international markets.
table of contents
consolidated results of operations
(for the year ended december31, in millions except per share amounts)
revenues
premiums
$
21,579
$
21,470
$
20,760
net investment income
2,792
3,761
3,517
fee income
net realized investment gains (losses)
(415
)
other revenues
total revenues
24,477
26,017
25,090
claims and expenses
claims and claim adjustment expenses
12,993
12,397
12,244
amortization of deferred acquisition costs
3,880
3,706
3,339
general and administrative expenses
3,518
3,352
3,458
interest expense
total claims and expenses
20,761
19,801
19,365
income before income taxes
3,716
6,216
5,725
income tax expense
1,615
1,517
net income
$
2,924
$
4,601
$
4,208
net income per share
basic
$
4.90
$
7.04
$
6.12
diluted
$
4.82
$
6.86
$
5.91
gaap combined ratio
loss and loss adjustment expense ratio
59.4
%
56.6
%
57.5
%
underwriting expense ratio
32.5
30.8
30.6
gaap combined ratio
91.9
%
87.4
%
88.1
%
the
company's discussions of net income and segment operating income included in the following discussion are presented on an after-tax basis. discussions of the components
of net income and segment operating income are presented on a pretax basis, unless otherwise noted. discussions of earnings per common share are presented on a diluted basis.
overview
net income of $4.82 per common share in 2008 was 30% lower than the $6.86 per common share in 2007. net income in 2008 totaled
$2.92billion, 36% lower than $4.60billion in 2007. the lower rate of decline in per share income compared with the rate of decline in actual income reflected the impact of the
company's significant common share repurchases. the decrease in net income in 2008 was primarily due to a significant increase in the cost of catastrophes and a significant decline in net investment
income. also contributing to the decline were net realized investment losses, a small increase in the number of large losses that exceeded expectations, an increase in non-catastrophe
related weather losses, the impact of competitive market conditions on pricing, the impact of loss cost trends and a decline in fee income. net income in 2008 reflected an $89million tax
benefit related to the sale of a subsidiary. in 2007, net income included a net pretax benefit of $163million due to the implementation of a new fixed, value-based compensation program for the
majority of the company's agents which resulted in a reduction in commission expense compared to what would have otherwise been reported, due to a change in the timing of expense recognition. these
factors were partially offset by an increase in net favorable prior year reserve development, which totaled $1.54billion in 2008,
table of contents
compared
with $546million in 2007. the cost of catastrophes in 2008, net of reinsurance and including hurricane-related assessments of $141million (discussed below), totaled
$1.41billion, compared with $167million in 2007. hurricanes ike and gustav, as well as several other storms throughout the united states, accounted for the cost of catastrophes in
2008. net income in 2007 also included a benefit of $86million resulting from the favorable resolution of various prior year federal tax matters and a pretax loss of $39million related
to the company's redemption of its 4.50% contingently convertible debentures.
hurricane-related
assessments include assessments from state-created insurance and windstorm insurance entities such as citizens property insurance corporation in florida, louisiana
citizens property insurance corporation and the texas windstorm insurance association. assessments are levied on insurers writing business in those states to fund the operating deficits of such
entities during periods of significant storm activity. hurricane-related assessments are reported as a component of "general and administrative expenses" as the amounts paid to such entities are not
insured losses of the company.
net
income of $6.86 per common share in 2007 was 16% higher than the $5.91 per common share in 2006. net income in 2007 totaled $4.60billion, 9% higher than $4.21billion
in 2006. the higher rate of growth in per share income compared with the rate of growth in actual income in 2007 over 2006 reflected the impact of the company's significant common share repurchases
since its repurchase program began in the second quarter of 2006. the increase in net income in 2007 reflected growth in net investment income, a higher level of net favorable prior year reserve
development, an increase in net realized investment gains, favorable current accident year results and increased business volume, partially offset by an increase in expenses and a decline in fee
income. net favorable prior year reserve
development totaled $546million in 2007, compared with net favorable prior year reserve development of $394million in 2006. expenses in 2007 included a net pretax benefit of
$163million due to the implementation of the new fixed, value-based compensation program for the majority of the company's agents. catastrophe losses in 2007 totaled $167million,
compared with $103million in 2006. net income in both 2007 and 2006 included after-tax benefits of $86million due to the favorable resolution of various prior year tax
matters. the 2007 total also included net realized investment gains of $154million, compared with net realized investment gains of $11million in 2006.
revenues
earned premiums
earned premiums in 2008 totaled $21.58billion, an increase of $109million, or less than 1%, over 2007. in march 2007,
the company sold its mexican surety subsidiary, afianzadora insurgentes,s.a. de c.v. (afianzadora insurgentes), which accounted for $27million of earned premiums in 2007 prior to its
sale. in april 2007, the company sold mendota insurance company and its subsidiaries (collectively, mendota), which primarily offered nonstandard automobile coverage and accounted for
$46million of earned premiums in 2007 prior to its sale. adjusting for these sales in 2007, consolidated earned premiums in 2008 increased by $182million, or 1%, over 2007. in the
business insurance segment, earned premiums in 2008 declined 1% from 2007 despite continued strong business retention rates, reflecting the impact of competitive market conditions on pricing and new
business. in the financial, professional& international insurance segment, earned premium growth of 2% in 2008 (adjusted for the sale of afianzadora insurgentes) was driven by changes in the
terms of certain reinsurance treaties for bond& financial products. in the personal insurance segment, earned premium growth of 3% in 2008 (adjusted for the sale of mendota) reflected
continued strong business retention rates and new business volume, coupled with continued renewal price increases.
earned
premiums in 2007 totaled $21.47billion, an increase of $710million, or 3%, over 2006. afianzadora insurgentes and mendota accounted for $78million and
$176million of earned premiums,
table of contents
respectively,
in 2006. adjusting for the sales of these subsidiaries in both years, earned premiums in 2007 grew 4% over 2006. in the business insurance segment, earned premium growth of 4% in 2007
over 2006 primarily reflected the impact of the growth in business volume over the preceding twelve
months. in the financial, professional& international insurance segment, earned premium growth of 4% in 2007 over 2006 (adjusted for the sale of afianzadora insurgentes) was driven by the
favorable impact of foreign currency rates of exchange, growth in business volume and a benefit from adjustments to prior year premium estimates for the company's operations at lloyd's. in the
personal insurance segment, earned premium growth of 6% in 2007 over 2006 (adjusted for the sale of mendota) reflected continued strong business retention rates, continued renewal price increases and
growth from new business volumes over the preceding twelve months.
net investment income
the following table sets forth information regarding the company's investments.
(for the year ended december31, in millions)
average investments(a)
$
74,197
$
73,872
$
71,252
pretax net investment income
2,792
3,761
3,517
after-tax net investment income
2,299
2,915
2,712
average pretax yield(b)
3.8
%
5.1
%
4.9
%
average after-tax yield(b)
3.1
%
3.9
%
3.8
%
(a)excludes
net unrealized investment gains and losses, net of tax, and is adjusted for cash, receivables for investment sales, payables on investment
purchases and accrued investment income.
(b)excludes
net realized gains and losses and unrealized investment gains and losses.
net
investment income of $2.79billion in 2008 declined $969million, or 26%, from 2007, primarily due to lower returns from non-fixed maturity investments,
which were negative in 2008, compared with strong positive returns in 2007. non-fixed maturity investments include private equity partnerships, hedge funds and real estate partnerships
that are accounted for under the equity method of accounting and typically report financial statement information on a lag. these partnerships and funds produced negative net investment income of
$327million in 2008 compared with net investment income of $473million in 2007. the value of many of these investments was updated through year-end based upon information
made available by certain of the investment managers. this update accounted for $87million of the non-fixed maturity portfolio's investment loss described above. the decline in net
investment income from these investments in 2008 reflected market conditions, which resulted in a lower level of transactions and lower market values compared to those at december31, 2007. net
investment income from the company's fixed maturity portfolio in 2008 also declined from 2007, primarily due to a significant decline in short-term interest rates. the amortized cost of
the fixed maturity portfolio at december31, 2008 totaled $61.57billion, $2.58billion lower than at the same date in 2007, primarily reflecting the use of $2.12billion
of funds for the company's common share repurchases during 2008, the payment of $715million of dividends to shareholders, the transfer of $662million of fixed maturity investments as
part of the sale of unionamerica, and $450million of contributions to the company's pension plan, which were partially offset by strong cash flows from operating activities. the average pretax
investment yield of 3.8% in 2008 declined from 5.1% in 2007, primarily reflecting the negative investment income from non-fixed maturity investments in 2008.
net
investment income totaled $3.76billion in 2007, an increase of $244million, or 7%, over 2006 net investment income of $3.52billion. the increase in 2007 was
primarily the result of continued growth in the company's fixed maturity portfolio resulting from strong cash flows from operating activities and higher yields on long-term taxable fixed
maturity securities. also contributing to investment income growth in 2007 were strong levels of net investment income from the company's
table of contents
real
estate partnerships. the amortized cost of the fixed maturity portfolio at december31, 2007 totaled $64.15billion, $1.91billion higher than year-end 2006. the
average pretax investment yield was 5.1% in 2007, compared with 4.9% in 2006. the increase primarily reflected strong returns generated by the real estate partnerships and higher yields on taxable
investments purchased in 2007.
except
as described below for certain legal entities, the company allocates its invested assets and the related net investment income to its reportable business segments. pretax net
investment income is allocated based upon an investable funds concept, which takes into account liabilities (net of non-invested assets) and appropriate capital considerations for each
segment. for investable funds, a benchmark investment yield is developed that reflects the estimated duration of the loss reserves' future cash flows, the interest rate environment at the time the
losses were incurred and a+ rated corporate debt instrument yields. for capital, a benchmark investment yield is developed that reflects the average yield on the total investment portfolio. the
benchmark investment yields are applied to each segment's investable funds and capital, respectively, to produce a total notional investment income by segment. the company's actual net investment
income is allocated to each segment in proportion to the respective segment's notional investment income to total notional investment income. there are certain legal entities within the company that
are dedicated to specific reportable business segments. the invested assets and related net investment income from these legal entities are reported in the applicable business segment and are not
allocated.
fee income
the national accounts market in the business insurance segment is the primary source of the company's fee-based business.
the declines in fee income in 2008 and 2007 compared with the respective prior years are described in the business insurance segment discussion that follows.
net realized investment gains (losses)
net realized investment losses of $415million in 2008 were driven by $420million of investment impairments. the 2008
impairments included $186million related to the deteriorated financial position of various issuers (including $70million related to securities issued by lehman brothers
holdingsinc. and its subsidiaries), $113million related to externally managed securities with respect to which the company does not have the ability to assert an intention to hold
until recovery in market value, $64million related to structured mortgage obligations and $57million related to securities the company has identified for potential sales prior to a
recovery in market value. net realized investment losses in 2008 also included $77million related to convertible bonds wherein the embedded option price is marked to market through realized
gains or losses and $53million of losses related to u.s. treasury futures contracts (which require a daily mark-to-market settlement and are used to shorten the
duration of the company's fixed maturity investment portfolio). partially offsetting these realized investment losses in 2008 were net realized gains of $50million related to foreign currency
exchange gains, $39million from the sale of subsidiaries and $17million of net realized investment gains from the sale of venture capital investments.
net
realized investment gains of $154million in 2007 included $91million of net realized investment gains (net of impairment losses of $16million) generated by
the venture capital portfolio (including an $81million net realized investment gain from the bundled sale of a substantial portion of the company's venture capital investment holdings),
$63million of net realized investment gains from the sale of a privately held security, $21million of net realized investment gains related to the company's holdings of stock purchase
warrants of platinum underwriters holdings,ltd., a publicly-held company, and $5million of net realized investment gains (net of impairment losses of $37million)
from the company's fixed maturity portfolio. these gains were partially offset by a net realized investment loss of $24million related to the divestiture of a subsidiary. net realized
investment gains in 2006 totaled $11million.
table of contents
further
information regarding the nature of impairment charges in each year is included in the "investment portfolio" section later in this discussion.
other revenues
other revenues in all periods presented primarily consist of premium installment charges. in 2007, other revenues also reflected a
$39million loss related to the company's redemption of its 4.50% convertible junior subordinated notes in april 2007, consisting of the redemption premium paid and the write-off of
remaining debt issuance costs. other revenues in 2006 included a $42million gain on the redemption of the company's $593million, 7.60% subordinated debentures.
written premiums
consolidated gross and net written premiums were as follows:
gross written premiums
(for the year ended december31, in millions)
business insurance
$
12,580
$
13,017
$
13,047
financial, professional& international insurance
3,966
4,037
3,981
personal insurance
7,291
7,144
7,011
total
$
23,837
$
24,198
$
24,039
net written premiums
(for the year ended december31, in millions)
business insurance
$
11,220
$
11,318
$
11,046
financial, professional& international insurance
3,468
3,465
3,393
personal insurance
6,995
6,835
6,711
total
$
21,683
$
21,618
$
21,150
afianzadora
insurgentes and mendota generated combined gross and net written premiums of $79million and $74million, respectively, in 2007, prior to their sale. adjusting
for the sale of these operations in 2007, gross written premiums in 2008 declined 1% and net written premiums in 2008 increased by less than 1% compared with 2007. in the business insurance segment,
net written premiums decreased by 1% from 2007, despite strong business retention rates. premium growth in industry-focused underwriting, select accounts and commercial accounts in 2008, which was
generally driven by strong business retention rates and new business volume, was largely offset by premium declines in national accounts, target risk underwriting and specialized distribution which
primarily resulted from declines in renewal price changes. net written premiums in the financial, professional& international insurance segment adjusted for the sale of afianzadora insurgentes
increased by 1% over 2007, largely driven by changes in the terms of certain reinsurance treaties that resulted in a higher level of business retained in the bond& financial products group. in
the personal insurance segment, net written premiums in 2008 adjusted for the sale of mendota increased 3% over 2007, reflecting continued strong retention rates, renewal price increases and growth in
new business levels.
afianzadora
insurgentes and mendota generated combined gross and net written premiums of $279million and $265million, respectively, in 2006. adjusting for the impact of
premium volume from those operations in both years, the company's consolidated gross and net written premiums in 2007 increased 2% and 3%, respectively, over 2006. in business insurance, net written
premium growth of 2% was concentrated in the commercial accounts, select accounts and industry-focused underwriting markets, primarily driven by strong business retention rates coupled with higher new
business volume.
table of contents
in
addition, a decline in premiums ceded for catastrophe reinsurance contributed to net written premium growth over 2006 in business insurance. in financial, professional& international
insurance, net written premium growth of 4% (adjusted for the sale of afianzadora insurgentes) reflected the favorable impact of foreign currency rates of exchange and strong business volume in
construction surety, in canada and at lloyd's. adjustments to prior year premium estimates for the company's operations at lloyd's also contributed to the growth in net premium volume in 2007. net
written premium growth of 4% in the personal insurance segment in 2007 (adjusted for the sale of mendota) was driven by continued strong retention rates and renewal price increases, partially offset
by a decline in new business volume, particularly for coastal coverages.
claims and expenses
claims and claim adjustment expenses
claims and claim adjustment expenses totaled $12.99billion in 2008, $596million, or 5%, higher than the 2007 total of
$12.40billion, primarily reflecting a significant increase in the cost of catastrophes, an increase in the number of large losses that exceeded expectations, an increase in
non-catastrophe related weather losses in personal insurance and the impact of loss cost trends. these factors were partially offset by an increase in net favorable prior year reserve
development. the cost of catastrophes included in claims and claim adjustment expenses in 2008 totaled $1.26billion, primarily resulting from hurricanes ike and gustav, as well as wind, rain
and hail storms in several regions of the united states throughout the year. the cost of catastrophes in 2007 totaled $167million, primarily resulting from wildfires in california and several
wind, rain and hail storms throughout the united states. net favorable prior year reserve development in 2008 totaled $1.54billion, compared with $546million of net favorable prior
year reserve development in 2007.
the
company's three business segments each experienced net favorable prior year reserve development in 2008. the majority of net favorable prior year reserve development occurred in the
business insurance segment and was driven by better than expected loss results primarily concentrated in the general liability, commercial multi-peril, commercial property and commercial automobile
product lines, partially offset by increases in workers' compensation reserves and $70million and $85million increases in asbestos and environmental reserves, respectively (which are
discussed in more detail in the "asbestos claims and litigation" and "environmental claims and litigation" sections herein). the financial, professional& international insurance segment
experienced favorable prior year loss experience in the international group, particularly in the public and products liability (general liability), professional indemnity (professional liability) and
property lines of business in the united kingdom, the general liability line of business in canada, and the aviation and property lines of business at lloyd's. in the personal insurance segment,
favorable prior year reserve development in 2008 was primarily driven by favorable loss experience related to hurricane katrina as well as better than expected loss experience in certain lines of
business within the homeowners and other product line.
each
of the company's three business segments also experienced net favorable prior year reserve development in 2007. in business insurance, net favorable prior year reserve development
was primarily driven by better than expected loss development for recent accident years in the commercial multi-peril, general liability, commercial automobile and property product lines. net total
prior year reserve development in 2007 in the business insurance segment included a $185million increase to environmental reserves. in the financial, professional& international
insurance segment, net favorable prior year reserve development in 2007 primarily reflected better than expected loss development in international property, employers' liability, professional
indemnity and motor lines of business for recent accident years. in the personal insurance segment, net favorable prior year reserve development in 2007 occurred in both the automobile and homeowners
and other lines of business.
table of contents
factors
contributing to net favorable prior year reserve development in each segment in 2008, 2007 and 2006 are discussed in more detail in the segment discussions that follow.
claims
and claim adjustment expenses of $12.40billion in 2007 were $153million, or 1%, higher than the 2006 total of $12.24billion. the 2007 total included
$546million of net favorable prior year reserve development and $167million of catastrophe losses, whereas the 2006 total included $394million of net favorable prior year
reserve development and $103million of catastrophe losses.
net
favorable prior year reserve development in 2006 was concentrated in the personal insurance segment, primarily reflecting better than expected loss experience in the auto bodily
injury and non-catastrophe related homeowners and other lines of business, and a reduction in loss estimates for the 2005 hurricanes. the business insurance segment also experienced net
favorable prior year loss experience in its ongoing operations in 2006, primarily in the commercial multi-peril, general liability, property and commercial automobile lines of business. the favorable
development in 2006 was partially offset by $155million and $120million increases to asbestos and environmental reserves, respectively, which are discussed in more detail in the
"asbestos claims and litigation" and "environmental claims and litigation" sections herein. there was also unfavorable prior year reserve development in runoff assumed reinsurance business in 2006.
in
2006, catastrophe losses totaled $103million, all of which was incurred in the personal insurance segment and resulted from several wind, rain, hail and snow storms in the
united states throughout the year.
amortization of deferred acquisition costs
the amortization of deferred acquisition costs totaled $3.88billion in 2008, $174million, or 5%, higher than the
comparable 2007 total of $3.71billion. the growth in amortization costs in 2008 primarily reflected the higher level of amortized commission expense resulting from the company's implementation
of a new fixed agent compensation program in 2007, described in more detail below.
the
amortization of deferred acquisition costs totaled $3.71billion in 2007, $367million, or 11%, higher than the comparable total of $3.34billion in 2006,
primarily reflecting a $213million increase from the implementation of a new fixed agent compensation program for the majority of the company's agents described below. the remaining increase
was primarily due to growth in business volume in 2007.
general and administrative expenses
general and administrative expenses totaled $3.52billion in 2008, an increase of $166million, or 5%, over the
comparable 2007 total of $3.35billion. this increase primarily reflected the impact of $141million of hurricane-related assessments.
general
and administrative expenses totaled $3.35billion in 2007, a decrease of $106million, or 3%, from the comparable 2006 total of $3.46billion. the decline
primarily reflected the impact of the company's implementation of the new fixed agent compensation program described in the following paragraph, which was largely offset by expenses related to
increased business volume and continued expenditures to support business growth and product development.
in
the first quarter of 2007, the company discontinued the use of contingent commissions and implemented a new fixed agent compensation program for all of its personal insurance
business. the company also offered the majority of its agents conducting commercial insurance business the option to switch to this new program. the company's total payout rate for all agent
compensation for 2007 was substantially the same as for 2006; however, the change to the new program created a difference in the timing of commission expense recognition. the cost of the new program
is required to be deferred and amortized over the related policy period (generally six to twelve months), whereas the cost of the
table of contents
contingent
commission program was not subject to deferred acquisition cost accounting treatment and, therefore, was expensed as incurred. that timing difference resulted in a benefit to income during
the 2007 transition year. the impact of this change in 2007 was to lower reported expenses by $376million in the "general and administrative expenses" income statement line, and increase
reported expenses by $213million in the "amortization of deferred acquisition costs" income statement line, compared to what would have been reported under the prior contingent commission
program.
interest expense
interest expense in 2008 totaled $370million, an increase of $24million, or 7%, over the 2007 total of
$346million. the increase primarily reflected a higher average level of debt outstanding at a higher weighted average interest rate during 2008. interest expense of $346million in 2007
was $22million higher than the comparable 2006 total of $324million. the increase primarily reflected the impact of the company's issuance of debt in 2007, which is described in more
detail in the "liquidity and capital resources" section herein. proceeds from a substantial portion of debt issuances in 2007 were used to fund the redemption and maturity of certain of the company's
indebtedness.
effective tax rate
the company's effective tax rate was 21.3%, 26.0% and 26.5% in 2008, 2007 and 2006, respectively. the declines in 2008 and 2007
primarily reflected a higher proportion of tax-exempt investment income.
gaap combined ratios
the consolidated loss and loss adjustment expense ratio of 59.4% for 2008 was 2.8 points higher than the loss and loss adjustment
expense ratio of 56.6% in 2007. the cost of catastrophes accounted for 5.8 points of the 2008 loss and loss adjustment expense ratio, whereas the 2007 loss and loss adjustment expense ratio included a
0.7 point impact from catastrophe losses. the 2008 and 2007 loss and loss adjustment expense ratios included 7.1 point and 2.5 point benefits, respectively, from net favorable prior year reserve
development. the 2008 loss and loss adjustment expense ratio adjusted for the cost of catastrophes and prior year reserve development was 2.3 points higher than the respective 2007 ratio on the same
basis, reflecting the impact of competitive market conditions on pricing, a small increase in the number of large losses, non-catastrophe weather related losses and loss cost trends.
the
underwriting expense ratio of 32.5% in 2008 was 1.7 points higher than the 2007 underwriting expense ratio of 30.8%. the 2008 expense ratio included a 0.7 point impact of the
hurricane-related assessments, whereas the 2007 ratio included a 0.8 point benefit from the implementation of the new fixed agent compensation program described above. adjusting for these factors in
both years, the adjusted 2008 expense ratio was 0.2 points higher than the adjusted expense ratio in 2007, reflecting
continued investments to support business growth and product development, as well as salary increases in the normal course of business.
the
consolidated loss and loss adjustment expense ratio of 56.6% in 2007 was 0.9 points lower than the comparable 2006 loss and loss adjustment expense ratio of 57.5%. the 2007 and 2006
loss and loss adjustment expense ratios included benefits of 2.5 points and 1.9 points, respectively, from net favorable prior year reserve development. catastrophe losses accounted for 0.7 points and
0.5 points of the 2007 and 2006 loss and loss adjustment expense ratios. excluding catastrophe losses and prior year reserve development, the 2007 loss and loss adjustment expense ratio improved by
0.5 points compared with the comparable 2006 ratio, reflecting continuing improvement in current accident year results in several lines of business. the underwriting expense ratio of 30.8% in 2007 was
0.2 points higher than the comparable 2006 underwriting expense ratio of 30.6%. the implementation of the new fixed agent compensation program described above provided a benefit of 0.8 points to the
expense ratios in 2007, which was more than offset by the increases in expenses discussed above.
table of contents
results of operations by segment
business insurance
results of the company's business insurance segment were as follows:
(for the year ended december31, in millions)
revenues:
earned premiums
$
11,180
$
11,283
$
10,876
net investment income
1,917
2,708
2,538
fee income
other revenues
total revenues
$
13,517
$
14,523
$
14,049
total claims and expenses
$
10,506
$
10,444
$
10,509
operating income
$
2,338
$
3,015
$
2,622
loss and loss adjustment expense ratio
57.7
%
57.1
%
60.3
%
underwriting expense ratio
32.5
30.7
30.6
gaap combined ratio
90.2
%
87.8
%
90.9
%
overview
operating income of $2.34billion in 2008 was $677million, or 22%, lower than operating income of $3.02billion
in 2007, primarily due to a significant decline in net investment income and an increase in the cost of catastrophes. also contributing to this reduction were a decline in fee income, the impact of
competitive market conditions on pricing, the impact of loss cost trends, and a small increase in the number of large property losses. a significant increase in net favorable prior year reserve
development in 2008 partially offset these factors. the cost of catastrophes in 2008 totaled $706million, compared with $4million in 2007. net favorable prior year reserve development
totaled $1.12billion and $301million in 2008 and 2007, respectively. operating income in 2008 included an $89million tax benefit related to the sale of unionamerica, which
comprised the company's united kingdom-based runoff direct insurance and reinsurance businesses. operating income in 2007 benefited by $81million from the company's implementation of the new
fixed agent compensation program (described in more detail in the "consolidated overview" section herein) and the resolution of certain tax matters.
operating
income of $3.02billion in 2007 was $393million, or 15%, higher than operating income of $2.62billion in 2006, primarily reflecting increases in net
favorable prior year reserve development and net investment income, the continuation of favorable current accident year results and the resolution of certain tax matters. in addition, results in 2007
benefited from the change to the new fixed agent compensation program. these factors were partially offset by an increase in general and administrative expenses and a decline in fee income in 2007.
net favorable prior year reserve development in 2007 and 2006 totaled $301million and $21million, respectively. catastrophe losses in 2007 totaled $4million, compared with no
catastrophe losses in 2006.
earned premiums
earned premiums of $11.18billion in 2008 decreased $103million, or 1%, from 2007, reflecting the impact of competitive
market conditions on pricing and new business. earned premiums of $11.28billion in 2007 increased 4% over 2006 earned premiums of $10.88billion, reflecting the growth in net written
premium volume in the majority of the markets comprising this segment, driven by strong business retention rates and increases in new business volume, partially offset by minor decreases in renewal
price changes.
table of contents
net investment income
refer to the "net investment income" section of "consolidated results of operations" herein for a discussion of the change in the
company's net investment income in 2008 and 2007 as compared with the prior year.
fee income
national accounts is the primary source of fee income due to its service businesses, which include claim and loss prevention services
to large companies that choose to self-insure a portion of their insurance risks, and claims and policy management services to workers' compensation residual market pools. the
$118million and $83million declines in fee income in 2008 and 2007, respectively, primarily resulted from lower serviced premium volume due to the depopulation of workers' compensation
residual market pools, the impact of lower loss costs on fee income (since fees are principally based on a percentage of losses or number of claims serviced, both of which have declined due to
workers' compensation reforms in numerous states), and lower new business volume due to increased competition.
claims and expenses
claims and claim adjustment expenses in 2008 totaled $6.61billion, an increase of $65million, or 1%, over 2007,
primarily reflecting a significant increase in the cost of catastrophes, a small increase in the number of large property losses and the impact of loss cost trends, which were largely offset by an
increase in net favorable prior year reserve development. the cost of catastrophes included in claims and claim adjustment expenses in 2008 totaled $642million, primarily resulting from
hurricanes ike and gustav as well as wind, rain and hail storms in several regions of the united states throughout the year. catastrophe losses in 2007 were $4million. net favorable prior year
reserve development in 2008 and 2007 totaled $1.12billion and $301million, respectively. net favorable prior year development in 2008 was driven by better than expected loss results
primarily concentrated
in the general liability and commercial multi-peril product lines, an increase in anticipated ceded recoveries for older accident years in the general liability product line and better than
anticipated loss development in the commercial property and commercial automobile product lines. the net favorable prior year reserve development in the general liability and commercial multi-peril
lines was attributable to several factors, including improved legal and judicial environments, as well as enhanced risk control, underwriting and claim process initiatives. the commercial property
product line improvement occurred primarily in the 2007 accident year as a result of better than expected loss development for certain large national property, national programs, and ocean marine
claim exposures and lower than expected weather-related losses during the last half of 2007, as well as favorable loss development in certain large inland marine claim exposures and in ceded
recoveries for commercial property large claims. in addition, the commercial multi-peril and property product lines' 2005 accident year results experienced improvement due to the litigation
environment relating to, and ongoing claim settlements for, hurricane katrina. the commercial automobile product line improvement was attributable to several factors, including improved legal and
judicial environments, as well as enhanced risk control, underwriting and claim process initiatives. the net favorable prior year reserve development in the foregoing product lines in 2008 was
partially offset by net unfavorable prior year reserve development in the workers' compensation product line, primarily driven by higher than anticipated medical costs related to 2004 and prior
accident years, and by $70million and $85million increases to asbestos and environmental reserves, respectively, which are discussed in more detail in the "asbestos claims and
litigation" and "environmental claims and litigation" sections herein.
net
favorable prior year reserve development of $301million in 2007 was primarily driven by better than expected loss development for recent accident years in the commercial
multi-peril, general liability, commercial automobile and property product lines. the commercial multi-peril and general
table of contents
liability
product lines experienced better than anticipated loss development that was attributable to several factors, including improved legal and judicial environments, as well as enhanced risk
control, underwriting and claim process initiatives. the commercial automobile product line experienced better than expected loss development due to more favorable legal and judicial environments,
claim handling initiatives focused on the automobile line of insurance and improvements in auto safety technology. the property product line experienced fewer than expected late reported claims
related to non-catastrophe weather events that occurred late in 2006, as well as better than expected frequency and severity due in part to changes in the marketplace, such as higher
deductibles and lower policy limits. in addition, the property product line experienced better than expected large loss outcomes which were partially attributable to favorable litigation resolutions.
net total prior year reserve development in 2007 included a $185million increase to environmental reserves. (refer to the "environmental claims and litigation" section herein for additional
discussion.)
claims
and claim adjustment expenses in 2007 of $6.67billion declined by $180million, or 3%, from the 2006 total of $6.85billion, primarily reflecting an increase
in net favorable prior year reserve development and continued favorable current accident year results, partially offset by an increase in business volume. net favorable prior year reserve development
in 2006 totaled $21million.
in
2006, net favorable prior year reserve development in the commercial multi-peril, general liability, property and commercial automobile lines of business was largely offset by
increases totaling $275million to asbestos and environmental reserves and reserve strengthening for assumed reinsurance business in runoff. the commercial multi-peril and liability lines of
business experienced better than anticipated loss development in 2006 that was attributable to several factors, including improving legal and judicial environments, as well as enhanced risk control,
underwriting and claim process initiatives. the favorable prior year reserve development in 2006 in the property line of business primarily reflected less "demand surge" inflation than originally
estimated for 2005 accident year non-catastrophe and catastrophe losses. "demand surge" refers to significant short-term increases in building material and labor costs due to a
sharp increase in demand for those materials and services. the commercial automobile line of business experienced better than expected loss development which was attributable to more favorable legal
and judicial environments, claim handling initiatives focused on the automobile line of insurance and improvements in auto safety technology. the reserve strengthening in assumed reinsurance was
primarily due to changes in projected loss development driven by an unanticipated change in the claim settlement patterns of the underlying casualty exposures.
the
amortization of deferred acquisition costs totaled $1.82billion in 2008, $76million, or 4%, higher than the comparable total of $1.74billion in 2007. the
growth in amortization costs primarily reflected the higher level of amortized commission expense in 2008 resulting from the company's implementation of a new fixed agent compensation program in 2007.
the amortization of deferred acquisition costs in 2007 was 13% higher than the 2006 total of $1.55billion. the increase reflected the growth in business volume, as well as a
$108million increase from the implementation of the new fixed agent compensation program (described in more detail in the "consolidated overview" section herein).
general
and administrative expenses totaled $2.08billion in 2008, an increase of $51million, or 3%, over the comparable 2007 total of $2.03billion. the increase
in 2008 primarily reflected the impact of $62million of hurricane-related assessments. general and administrative expenses in 2007 were 4% lower than the comparable total of
$2.10billion in 2006. the implementation of the new fixed agent compensation program in the first quarter of 2007 resulted in a reduction of $189million in reported general and
administrative expenses in 2007 compared to what would have been reported under the prior contingent commission program during those periods. that reduction was partially offset by an increase in
expenses related to growth in business volume and continuing expenditures to support business growth and product development. the 2006 total included a provision for legal expenses related to
investigations of various business practices by certain governmental agencies.
table of contents
gaap combined ratio
the loss and loss adjustment expense ratio in 2008 of 57.7% was 0.6 points higher than the comparable 2007 ratio of 57.1%. the cost of
catastrophes accounted for 5.7 points of the loss and loss adjustment expense ratio in 2008, compared with no impact from catastrophes in 2007. net favorable prior year reserve development provided
10.0 point and 2.6 point benefits to the loss and loss adjustment expense ratio in 2008 and 2007, respectively. the 2008 loss and loss adjustment expense ratio adjusted for the cost of catastrophes
and prior year reserve development was 2.3 points higher than the 2007 ratio on the same basis, reflecting the impact of competitive market conditions on pricing over the preceding twelve months and
loss cost trends, as well as a small increase in the number of large property losses.
the
loss and loss adjustment expense ratio of 57.1% in 2007 was 3.2 points lower than the comparable 2006 ratio of 60.3%. in 2007, net favorable prior year reserve development provided a
2.6 point benefit to the loss and loss adjustment expense ratio, whereas the 2006 loss and loss adjustment expense ratio included a 0.2 point benefit from net favorable prior year reserve development.
adjusting for the impact of prior year reserve development in both years, the loss and loss adjustment expense ratio in 2007 was 0.8 points better than the comparable 2006 ratio, reflecting favorable
current accident year results in 2007.
the
underwriting expense ratio of 32.5% in 2008 was 1.8 points higher than the comparable 2007 ratio of 30.7%. the 2008 expense ratio included a 0.6 point impact of the hurricane-related
assessments, whereas the 2007 ratio included a 0.7 point benefit from the implementation of the new fixed agent compensation program described in the "consolidated overview" section herein. adjusting
for these factors in both years, the adjusted 2008 expense ratio was 0.5 points higher than the adjusted expense ratio for 2007, primarily reflecting continued investments to support business growth
and product development, the impact of a decline in the rate of earned premium growth relative to expense growth, and declines in fee income. a portion of fee income is accounted for as a reduction of
expenses for purposes of calculating the expense ratio.
the
underwriting expense ratio of 30.7% in 2007, which included a 0.7 point benefit resulting from the implementation of the new fixed agent compensation program, was 0.1 points higher
than the 2006 ratio, reflecting the increases in general and administrative expenses described above, and the impact of a decline in fee income.
written premiums
the business insurance segment's gross and net written premiums by market were as follows:
gross written premiums
(for the year ended december31, in millions)
select accounts
$
2,804
$
2,774
$
2,733
commercial accounts
2,729
2,740
2,613
national accounts
1,577
1,859
2,169
industry-focused underwriting
2,485
2,380
2,279
target risk underwriting
2,029
2,182
2,187
specialized distribution
1,033
1,036
total business insurance core
12,578
12,968
13,017
business insurance other
total business insurance
$
12,580
$
13,017
$
13,047
table of contents
net written premiums
(for the year ended december31, in millions)
select accounts
$
2,756
$
2,711
$
2,663
commercial accounts
2,524
2,518
2,376
national accounts
1,056
1,135
industry-focused underwriting
2,396
2,301
2,196
target risk underwriting
1,593
1,665
1,629
specialized distribution
1,015
1,022
total business insurance core
11,204
11,266
11,021
business insurance other
total business insurance
$
11,220
$
11,318
$
11,046
in
business insurance core, gross and net written premiums in 2008 decreased by 3% and 1% from 2007, respectively. the difference in rates of decline between gross and net written
premiums in 2008 was concentrated in national accounts, where a significant portion of gross written premiums is ceded to other insurers and residual market pools. as a result, the decline in gross
written premiums did not have a proportional impact on net written premiums. net written premium growth in the industry-focused underwriting, select accounts and commercial accounts groups generally
reflected higher
business retention levels and new business volume in several business units within these groups. this was more than offset by premium declines in specialized distribution, target risk underwriting and
national accounts.
in
2007, business insurance core gross written premiums declined $49million, or less than 1%, from the comparable 2006 total, whereas net written premiums increased
$245million, or 2%, compared with 2006. the difference in growth rates between gross and net written premiums in 2007 was also concentrated in national accounts due to the same factor
described above. all markets in business insurance core operations, except national accounts and specialized distribution, recorded net written premium growth in 2007, driven by higher new business
volume throughout the majority of markets coupled with continued strong business retention rates, offset in some markets by minor decreases in renewal price changes. net written premium growth in 2007
also benefited from a reduction in ceded premiums related to catastrophe reinsurance coverage.
select accounts.net written premiums of $2.76billion in 2008 increased 2% over 2007. business retention rates in 2008 remained
strong and
were slightly higher than in 2007. renewal price changes remained positive but declined from 2007. in the aggregate, new business volume in 2008 was virtually level with 2007. the company experienced
a favorable impact on its new business volume from its enhanced quote-to-issue agency platform and multivariate pricing program for smaller businesses served by select
accounts. however, new business volume for larger accounts in 2008 declined from 2007 primarily due to competitive market conditions.
net
written premiums of $2.71billion in 2007 grew 2% over 2006. new business volume increased over 2006, due in part to the introduction of the company's enhanced
quote-to-issue agency platform and multivariate pricing program in 37 states. enhanced marketing efforts and additional products sold to existing customers also contributed to
new business growth in 2007. business retention rates remained strong in 2007. renewal price changes in this market remained positive in 2007 but were lower than in 2006, as price increases for
coastal coverages were partially offset by declines in renewal price changes for non-coastal coverages, which continue to be impacted by competitive market conditions.
commercial accounts.net written premiums of $2.52billion in 2008 were virtually level with the 2007 total. business retention
rates in 2008
remained strong and were higher than in 2007. renewal
table of contents
price
changes were slightly negative in 2008, and were lower than in 2007. new business levels also declined when compared with 2007, reflecting competitive market conditions in this market.
net
written premiums of $2.52billion in 2007 grew 6% over 2006, primarily driven by an increase in new business volume, coupled with continued strong business retention rates.
the growth in new business volume reflected the impact of product introductions, additional products sold to existing customers and increased marketing efforts. renewal price changes in this market
declined from 2006 and were negative in 2007, primarily reflecting competitive market conditions.
national accounts.net written premiums of $1.00billion in 2008 decreased 6% from 2007. the decline primarily reflected a
significant decline
in renewal price changes, as the price charged for national accounts' products is adjusted based on actual loss performance, which continues to be favorable due to workers' compensation reforms.
overall new business volume increased slightly over 2007. business retention rates in 2008 remained strong and increased over 2007.
net
written premiums of $1.06billion in 2007 declined 7% from 2006, primarily reflecting competitive market conditions that resulted in lower business volume.
industry-focused underwriting.net written premiums of $2.40billion in 2008 increased 4% over 2007. all business units in this
market
recorded net written premium growth in 2008. growth in construction net written premiums in 2008 was driven by strong business retention levels coupled with continued strong new business volume. an
increase in new business volume was the primary factor in the growth in net written premiums in the oil& gas business unit. in agribusiness, net written premium growth was driven by increases
in business retention rates and renewal price changes. in the public sector business unit, the increase in net written premiums was driven by higher new business volume coupled with continued strong
business retention rates.
net
written premiums of $2.30billion in 2007 increased 5% over 2006. the increase was driven by the construction business unit, where favorable economic conditions contributed to
higher new business volume; the oil& gas business unit, due to increased business retention rates and strong renewal price changes; and the public sector unit, due to an increase in retention
rates. in addition, strong new business volume and business retention rates in the agribusiness business unit contributed to premium growth in 2007. net written premiums in the technology business
unit in 2007 were level with 2006.
target risk underwriting.net written premiums of $1.59billion in 2008 decreased 4% from 2007. the decline was concentrated in the
national
property business unit, reflecting reductions in renewal price changes and new business volume due to competitive market conditions, and in the inland marine business unit, primarily reflecting
reductions in business retention rates and new business volume due to general economic conditions. in addition, the global accounts business unit experienced a reduction in net written premiums due to
declines in business retention rates, renewal price changes and new
business. partially offsetting the declines in these business units was an increase in net written premiums in the excess casualty business unit, where renewal price changes remained negative but
improved over 2007 and business retention levels increased.
net
written premiums of $1.67billion in 2007 grew 2% over 2006, driven by increases in the inland marine and national property business units. strong growth in new business
volume accounted for the increase in inland marine net written premiums, whereas national property's premium growth was driven by continued strong business retention rates and a decline in premiums
ceded for catastrophe reinsurance coverage, partially offset by a decrease in renewal price changes, which were negative. growth in these two business units was partially offset by a decline in excess
casualty net written premiums.
specialized distribution.net written premiums of $939million in 2008 decreased 7% from 2007. the premium decline reflected
negative renewal
price changes in both the northland and national
table of contents
programs
business units. in the national programs business unit, business retention rates increased over 2007, but new business levels declined compared with 2007. in the northland business unit,
business retention rates and new business levels remained strong, but were down slightly compared with 2007.
net
written premiums of $1.02billion in 2007 declined less than 1% from 2006. the decline was primarily due to premium reductions in the national programs business unit, driven
by reductions in new business volume and business retention rates due to competitive market conditions. these reductions were largely offset by premium growth in the northland business unit due to
strong business retention rates and new business volume.
in
business insurance other, the runoff healthcare, reinsurance and international business produced minimal net written premiums in 2008, 2007 and 2006.
financial, professional& international insurance
results of the company's financial, professional& international insurance segment were as follows:
(for the year ended december31, in millions)
revenues:
earned premiums
$
3,429
$
3,384
$
3,321
net investment income
other revenues
total revenues
$
3,907
$
3,907
$
3,776
total claims and expenses
$
3,004
$
2,981
$
2,968
operating income
$
$
$
loss and loss adjustment expense ratio
51.2
%
50.8
%
53.7
%
underwriting expense ratio
36.0
36.8
35.3
gaap combined ratio
87.2
%
87.6
%
89.0
%
overview
operating income of $649million in 2008 decreased by $26million, or 4%, from 2007. the decline in operating income was
primarily driven by an increase in the number of large losses that exceeded expectations within international, an increase in the cost of catastrophes and a decline in net investment income, largely
offset by a significant increase in net favorable prior year reserve development. the cost of catastrophes in 2008 was $84million, compared with no catastrophe losses in 2007. net favorable
prior year reserve development totaled $274 and $93million in 2008 and 2007, respectively.
operating
income of $675million in 2007 was $66million, or 11%, higher than operating income of $609million in 2006, primarily driven by an increase in net
favorable prior year reserve development, higher net investment income and favorable current accident year results. these factors were partially offset by an increase in general and administrative
expenses and non-catastrophe losses incurred in the united kingdom related to flooding. net favorable prior year reserve development totaled $93million in 2007, compared with
$14million in 2006.
in
march 2007, the company completed the sale of afianzadora insurgentes, which accounted for $25million and $78million of net written premiums for the years ended
december31, 2007 and 2006, respectively. the impact of this transaction was not material to the company's results of operations or financial position.
table of contents
earned premiums
earned premiums of $3.43billion in 2008 increased $45million, or 1%, over the 2007 total of $3.38billion.
adjusting for the sale of afianzadora insurgentes in 2007, earned premium growth of 2% in 2008 was concentrated in the construction services business unit of the bond& financial products group
due to changes in the terms of certain reinsurance treaties that resulted in a higher level of business retained in the first quarter of the year.
earned
premiums in 2007 were slightly higher than in 2006. adjusting for the sale of afianzadora insurgentes in both years, earned premiums in 2007 grew 3% over 2006. earned premium
growth was concentrated in the international group, driven by the favorable impact of foreign currency rates of exchange and growth in business volume over the preceding twelve months. earned premium
growth in 2007 also benefited from adjustments to prior year premium estimates for the company's operations at lloyd's.
net investment income
refer to the "net investment income" section of "consolidated results of operations" herein for a discussion of the change in the
company's net investment income in 2008 and 2007 as compared with the prior year, as well as a discussion of the company's net investment income allocation methodology.
claims and expenses
claims and claim adjustment expenses of $1.77billion in 2008 increased by $32million, or 2%, over 2007. an increase in
the cost of catastrophes and an increase in the number of large losses that exceeded expectations within international in 2008 were largely offset by a significant increase in net favorable prior year
reserve development. the cost of catastrophes included in claims and claim adjustment expenses in 2008 totaled $73million, compared with no catastrophe losses in 2007. hurricanes ike and
gustav accounted for the majority of catastrophe losses in 2008.
net
favorable prior year reserve development totaled $274million in 2008, primarily driven by better than expected loss experience in the international group. the improvements in
longer-tail lines of business were attributable to several factors, including enhanced risk control and underwriting strategies throughout the international group. in the property line of
business, the improvement primarily resulted from better than anticipated loss development in the united kingdom, in part due to favorable claim activity relating to 2007 flood losses. in the
bond& financial products group, better than expected loss experience for the contract surety business within the fidelity and surety product line, resulting from favorable settlements on large
claims (primarily from accident years prior to 2005), resulted in net favorable prior year reserve development in 2008. in 2007, net favorable prior year reserve development totaled
$93million, primarily reflecting better than expected loss development in international property, employers' liability, professional indemnity and motor lines of business for recent accident
years, which was attributable to several factors, including enhanced pricing and underwriting strategies throughout the international operations, and the favorable impact of legal and judicial reforms
in ireland.
claims
and claim adjustment expenses totaled $1.74billion in 2007, a decrease of 3% from 2006, primarily reflecting an increase in net favorable prior year reserve development
and the impact of the sale of afianzadora insurgentes, partially offset by the increase in business volume, $37million of non-catastrophe losses incurred in the united kingdom in
2007 related to flooding and the impact of foreign currency rates of exchange. net favorable prior year reserve development in 2006 totaled $14million.
general
and administrative expenses in 2008 totaled $581million, $9million lower than in 2007, primarily reflecting a decrease in commission expense. the company's
implementation of the new fixed
table of contents
agent
compensation program in the first quarter of 2007 did not have a material impact on the financial, professional& international insurance segment. general and administrative expenses
totaled $590million in 2007, an increase of 10% over the 2006 total of $536million. the increase primarily reflected the segment's continued expenditures to support business growth and
the impact of foreign currency exchange rates.
gaap combined ratio
the loss and loss adjustment expense ratio of 51.2% in 2008 was 0.4 points higher than the 2007 ratio of 50.8%. the 2008 ratio included
an 8.0 point benefit from net favorable prior year reserve development and a 2.3 point impact from the cost of catastrophes, whereas the 2007 ratio included a 2.7 point benefit from net favorable
prior year reserve development and no impact from catastrophe losses. the 2008 loss and loss adjustment expense ratio adjusted for catastrophe losses and prior year reserve development was 3.4 points
higher than the 2007 ratio on the same basis, primarily reflecting an increase in the number of large losses that exceeded expectations within international. the underwriting expense ratio of 36.0% in
2008 was 0.8 points lower than in 2007. the 2008 expense ratio included a 0.2 point impact of hurricane-related assessments. adjusting for these assessments, the 2008 expense ratio was 1.0 points
lower than the expense ratio in 2007, reflecting reduced acquisition costs.
the
loss and loss adjustment expense ratio of 50.8% in 2007 was 2.9 points lower than the 2006 ratio of 53.7%. the 2007 ratio included a 2.7 point benefit from net favorable prior year
reserve development, compared with a 0.4 point benefit in 2006. excluding this factor in each year, the 2007 ratio was 0.6 points lower than the 2006 ratio. the underwriting expense ratio of 36.8% in
2007 was 1.5 points higher than the comparable 2006 expense ratio, driven by the increase in expenses supporting business growth.
written premiums
financial, professional& international insurance gross and net written premiums by market were as follows:
gross written premiums
(for the year ended december31, in millions)
bond& financial products
$
2,507
$
2,614
$
2,657
international
1,459
1,423
1,324
total financial, professional& international insurance
$
3,966
$
4,037
$
3,981
net written premiums
(for the year ended december31, in millions)
bond& financial products
$
2,228
$
2,228
$
2,255
international
1,240
1,237
1,138
total financial, professional& international insurance
$
3,468
$
3,465
$
3,393
afianzadora
insurgentes generated gross and net written premiums of $30million and $25million, respectively, in 2007. adjusting for the sale of that operation in 2007,
gross written premiums in 2008 declined 1% from 2007, whereas net written premiums increased 1% over 2007. the difference in 2008 gross and net written premium growth rates primarily reflected changes
in the terms of certain of the company's reinsurance treaties that resulted in a higher level of business retained in the bond& financial products group.
table of contents
in the bond& financial products group, net written premiums in 2008 increased 1% over 2007 (adjusted for the sale of afianzadora insurgentes), as the
impact of the higher level of business retained in 2008 was largely offset by a decline in premium volume due to competitive market conditions and the economic downturn. in the bond& financial
products group (excluding the surety line of business, for which the following are not relevant measures), business retention rates in 2008 remained strong and increased slightly over 2007. renewal
price changes in 2008 were slightly negative, compared to an increase in the prior year, and new business levels were consistent with 2007.
net
written premiums in the international group in 2008 were flat with 2007. for the international group in 2008, business retention rates declined from 2007 due to the intentional
non-renewal of certain property business in canada and more competitive market conditions at lloyd's. renewal price changes in 2008 were flat, compared to a decrease in 2007, and new
business volume increased.
gross
and net written premiums in 2007 increased 1% and 2%, respectively, over 2006. adjusting for the sale of afianzadora insurgentes, gross and net written premiums increased 3% and
4%, respectively, over 2006. net written premiums in the bond& financial products group in 2007 increased 1% over 2006 (adjusted for the sale of afianzadora insurgentes), primarily due to
increased construction surety business volume resulting from strong economic conditions in the public works sector of the construction industry. for bond and financial products (excluding the surety
line of business), business retention rates in 2007 increased over 2006. renewal price changes in 2007 were
positive but down from 2006, and new business levels declined due in part to competitive market conditions. in the international group, net written premiums in 2007 increased $99million, or
9%, over 2006, primarily reflecting the favorable impact of foreign currency exchange rates and strong business volume at lloyd's and in canada. net written premium volume in the international group
in 2007 also benefited from adjustments to prior year premium estimates in the lloyd's operation. in the international group in 2007, business retention rates remained strong, new business volume
increased over 2006, and renewal price changes declined from 2006.
personal insurance
results of the company's personal insurance segment were as follows:
(for the year ended december31, in millions)
revenues:
earned premiums
$
6,970
$
6,803
$
6,563
net investment income
other revenues
total revenues
$
7,466
$
7,452
$
7,205
total claims and expenses
$
6,855
$
5,996
$
5,555
operating income
$
$
1,019
$
1,132
loss and loss adjustment expense ratio
66.2
%
58.6
%
54.8
%
underwriting expense ratio
30.8
28.2
28.3
gaap combined ratio
97.0
%
86.8
%
83.1
%
overview
operating income of $465million in 2008 was $554million, or 54%, lower than operating income in 2007, primarily
reflecting an increase in the cost of catastrophes. also contributing to the decline in 2008 were the impact of a reduction in net investment income, an increase in non-catastrophe related
weather losses and loss cost trends. the cost of catastrophes in 2008 totaled $618million, compared
table of contents
with
$163million in 2007. net favorable prior year reserve development in 2008 and 2007 totaled $143million and $152million, respectively. in addition, results in 2007
benefited by $71million from the company's implementation of a new fixed agent compensation program, which is described in more detail in the "consolidated overview" section herein.
operating
income of $1.02billion in 2007 was $113million, or 10%, lower than operating income of $1.13billion in 2006, primarily reflecting a decline in net
favorable prior year reserve development and an increase in catastrophe losses, partially offset by growth in business volume and net investment income and the $71million benefit from the new
fixed agent compensation program. net favorable prior year reserve development in 2007 and 2006 totaled $152million and $359million, respectively. catastrophe losses in 2007 totaled
$163million, compared with catastrophe losses of $103million in 2006.
in
april 2007, the company completed the sale of its subsidiary, mendota insurance company, and its wholly-owned subsidiaries, mendakota insurance company and mendota insurance
agency,inc. (collectively, mendota). these subsidiaries primarily offered nonstandard automobile coverage and accounted for $49million and $187million of net written premiums
in the years ended december31, 2007 and 2006, respectively. the impact of this transaction was not material to the company's results of operations or financial position.
earned premiums
earned premiums of $6.97billion in 2008 increased $167million, or 2%, over earned premiums of $6.80billion in
2007. adjusting for the sale of mendota in 2007, earned premiums in 2008 increased 3% over 2007. the increase reflected continued strong business retention rates and new business volume, coupled with
continued renewal price increases. earned premiums of $6.80billion in 2007 grew 4% over 2006, primarily reflecting continued strong business retention rates, increases in renewal price
changes, and growth from new business volume, partially offset by the impact
of the sale of mendota in early april 2007. adjusting for the impact of mendota in both years, earned premiums in 2007 increased 6% over 2006.
net investment income
refer to the "net investment income" section of "consolidated results of operations" herein for a discussion of the change in the
company's net investment income in 2008 and 2007 as compared with the prior year.
claims and expenses
claims and claim adjustment expenses in 2008 totaled $4.62billion, an increase of $629million, or 16%, over 2007,
primarily reflecting a significant increase in the cost of catastrophes, non-catastrophe weather related losses in the homeowners and other product line, the impact of loss cost trends and
increased business volume. the cost of catastrophes included in claim and claim adjustment expenses in 2008 totaled $541million, compared with $163million in 2007. catastrophe losses
in 2008 primarily resulted from hurricanes ike and gustav, as well as tornado, wind and hail storms in various regions of the united states throughout the year. net favorable prior year reserve
development in 2008 and 2007 totaled $143million and $152million, respectively. the 2008 net favorable prior year reserve development was primarily driven by favorable loss experience
related to hurricane katrina, and better than expected loss experience from recent accident years for the homeowners and other product line. this improvement was driven in part by claim initiatives as
well as better than expected outcomes on 2007 catastrophe-related claims. in addition, the homeowners and other product line experienced improvement in older accident years for the umbrella line as
well as favorable experience from accident year 2007 for allied coverages due to less than expected claim activity. net favorable prior year reserve development in 2007 of $152million was
driven by better than expected automobile loss experience due
table of contents
in
part to claim initiatives and fewer than expected late reported homeowners' claims related to non-catastrophe weather events that occurred in the fourth quarter of 2006. in addition, a
portion of net favorable prior year reserve development in the homeowners and other line of business in 2007 was attributable to a decrease in the number of claims due to changes in the marketplace,
including higher deductibles and fewer small-dollar claims.
claims
and claim adjustment expenses in 2007 totaled $3.99billion, an increase of $390million, or 11%, over 2006, primarily reflecting a decline in net favorable prior
year reserve development, an increase in catastrophe losses and higher business volume, partially offset by the impact of the sale of mendota.
net
favorable prior year reserve development of $359million in 2006 was driven by better than expected loss experience in the auto bodily injury and non-catastrophe
related homeowners and other lines of business, and a reduction in loss estimates for the 2005 hurricanes. in the automobile line of business, the improvement in 2006 was partially driven by better
than expected results from changes in claim handling practices. these changes included practices which have allowed case reserves to be established more accurately earlier in the claim settlement
process, thereby changing historical loss development patterns. in addition, industry and company initiatives to fight fraud in several states led to a decrease in the total number of claims and a
change in historical loss development patterns. in the homeowners and other line of business, favorable prior year reserve development in 2006 was partially driven by a significant decrease in the
number of claims, attributable to changes in the marketplace, including higher deductibles and fewer small-dollar claims. these changes also resulted in a change in historical loss development
patterns. in addition, for 2006, non-catastrophe related homeowners and other loss experience was favorable due to continued evidence of a less than expected impact from "demand surge,"
which refers to significant short-term increases in building material and labor costs due to a sharp increase in demand for those materials and services. approximately $100million
of net favorable prior year reserve development in 2006 resulted from a reduction in loss estimates for catastrophes incurred in 2005, primarily due to lower than expected additional living expense
losses related to hurricane katrina.
catastrophe
losses in 2007 totaled $163million, $60million higher than the 2006 total of $103million. catastrophe losses in 2007 were primarily the result of
wildfires in california and several storms throughout the united states, whereas the 2006 total was driven by several wind, rain, hail and snow storms throughout the year in the united states.
the
amortization of deferred acquisition costs totaled $1.41billion in 2008, compared with $1.31billion in 2007. the growth in amortization costs in 2008 primarily
reflected the higher level of amortized commission expense in 2008 resulting from the company's implementation of a new fixed agent compensation program in 2007, as well as an increase in business
volume.
the
amortization of deferred acquisition costs totaled $1.31billion in 2007, $156million, or 14%, higher than the comparable 2006 total of $1.15billion. the
increase included $94million from the implementation of the new fixed agent compensation program in 2007 described in more detail in the "consolidated overview" section herein, as well as
growth in business volume, partially offset by the impact of the sale of mendota
general
and administrative expenses totaled $829million in 2008, an increase of $130million, or 19% over the 2007 total of $699million. the increase in 2008
included the impact of $77million of hurricane-related assessments. the remaining increase reflected growth in business volume and continued investments to support business growth and product
development.
general
and administrative expenses totaled $699million in 2007, a decrease of $105million, or 13%, from the 2006 total of $804million. the decrease in expenses
in 2007 primarily reflected a decline in commission expenses resulting from the implementation of the new fixed agent compensation program, as well as the impact of the sale of mendota, which were
partially offset by expenses related
table of contents
to
increased business volume, and continued investments to support business growth and product development. the implementation of the new fixed agent compensation program in 2007 resulted in a
$165million reduction in reported general and administrative expenses, compared to what would have been reported under the prior contingent commission program.
gaap combined ratio
the loss and loss adjustment expense ratio of 66.2% in 2008 was 7.6 points higher than the comparable 2007 ratio of 58.6%. the 2008
ratio included a 7.8 point impact of the cost of catastrophes and a 2.1 point benefit from net favorable prior year reserve development, whereas the 2007 ratio included a 2.4 point impact of the cost
of catastrophes and a 2.2 point benefit from net favorable prior year reserve development. the 2008 loss and loss adjustment expense ratio adjusted for catastrophe losses and prior year reserve
development was 2.1 points higher than the 2007 ratio on the same basis, primarily reflecting the impact of an increase in non-catastrophe weather related losses in the homeowners and
other line of business and loss cost trends.
the
loss and loss adjustment expense ratio of 58.6% in 2007 was 3.8 points higher than the comparable 2006 ratio of 54.8%, primarily reflecting the decline in net favorable prior year
reserve development. the ratio in 2007 included a 2.2 point benefit from net favorable prior year reserve development, compared with a 5.5 point benefit in 2006. catastrophe losses accounted for 2.4
points and 1.6 points, respectively, of the loss and loss adjustment expense ratios in 2007 and 2006. excluding the impact of prior year development and catastrophes in both years, the adjusted 2007
loss and loss adjustment expense ratio was 0.3 points lower than the adjusted 2006 ratio.
the
underwriting expense ratio of 30.8% in 2008 was 2.6 points higher than the 2007 ratio of 28.2%. the 2008 ratio included a 1.1 point impact from hurricane-related assessments, whereas
the 2007 ratio included a 1.0 point benefit from the implementation of the new fixed agent compensation program described in the "consolidated overview" section herein. adjusting for these factors,
the 2008 expense ratio was 0.5 points higher than the adjusted expense ratio for 2007, primarily reflecting continued investments to support business growth and product development.
the
underwriting expense ratio in 2007, excluding the 1.0 point benefit from the implementation of the new fixed agent compensation program, was 0.9 points higher than the 2006 expense
ratio of 28.3%, reflecting the impact of continued investments to support business growth and product development.
written premiums
the personal insurance segment's gross and net written premiums by product line were as follows:
gross written premiums
(for the year ended december31, in millions)
automobile
$
3,689
$
3,673
$
3,731
homeowners and other
3,602
3,471
3,280
total personal insurance
$
7,291
$
7,144
$
7,011
net written premiums
(for the year ended december31, in millions)
automobile
$
3,660
$
3,628
$
3,692
homeowners and other
3,335
3,207
3,019
total personal insurance
$
6,995
$
6,835
$
6,711
table of contents
gross
and net written premiums in 2008 both increased 2% over the comparable 2007 totals. mendota accounted for $49million of both gross and net written premiums in 2007.
adjusting for the sale of mendota in 2007, gross and net written premiums in 2008 both increased 3% over the 2007 totals.
in
the automobile line of business, net written premiums increased 2% over 2007, adjusting for the sale of mendota. business retention rates in 2008 remained strong and were consistent
with 2007. renewal price changes in 2008 remained positive and consistent with 2007. new business levels in 2008 increased over 2007. in the homeowners and other line of business, net written premiums
in 2008 grew 4% over 2007. business retention rates in 2008 remained strong and were consistent with 2007. renewal price changes in 2008 remained positive but declined from 2007. new business levels
also remained strong and increased slightly over 2007.
gross
and net written premiums in 2007 both increased 2% over the respective totals in 2006. adjusting for the sale of mendota in both years, net written premiums in the personal
insurance segment in 2007 increased 4% over 2006, driven by continued strong retention rates and increases in renewal price changes, partially offset by a decline in new business volume.
in
the automobile line of business, net written premiums in 2007 declined 2%, from 2006. adjusting for the impact of the sale of mendota, net written premiums in the automobile line of
business in 2007 increased 2% over 2006. that growth primarily reflected renewal price change increases coupled with continued strong retention rates, partially offset by a decline in new business
volume due to competitive market conditions.
in
the homeowners and other line of business, net written premiums in 2007 grew 6% over 2006, primarily reflecting renewal price change increases, particularly for coastal coverages,
coupled with continued strong retention rates. new business volume in this line of business in 2007 declined from 2006, primarily driven by strategies to reduce exposure to losses on the atlantic and
gulf coasts of the united states. adjusting for the sale of mendota for both years, net written premiums in the homeowners and other line of business in 2007 increased 7% over 2006.
the
personal insurance segment had approximately 7.4million and 7.2million policies in force at december31, 2008 and 2007, respectively. in the automobile line of
business, policies in force at december31, 2008 increased 2% over the same date in 2007. policies in force in the homeowners and other line of business at december31, 2008 grew by 3%
over the same date in 2007.
interest expense and other
(for the year ended december31, in millions)
net loss
$
(257
)
$
(209
)
$
(163
)
the
$48million increase in net loss for interest expense and other in 2008 compared with 2007 was primarily driven by a $52million benefit in 2007 resulting from the
favorable resolution of various prior year tax matters. the net loss in 2008 included after-tax interest expense of $239million, compared with $224million in 2007. the net
loss in 2007 also included an after-tax loss of $25million related to the company's redemption of its 4.50% contingently convertible debentures in april 2007, consisting of the
redemption premium paid and the write-off of remaining debt issuance costs.
the
$46million increase in net loss for interest expense and other in 2007 compared with 2006 was driven by the impact of debt redemptions in each year. the net loss in 2007
included the after-tax loss of $25million related to the company's redemption of its 4.50% convertible junior subordinated notes. conversely, the net loss in 2006 was reduced by a
$27million after-tax gain realized on the redemption of the company's $593million, 7.6% subordinated debentures. after-tax interest expense in
table of contents
totaled $224million, compared with $207million in 2006. the net losses in this category for 2007 and 2006 were reduced by the favorable resolution of various prior year tax
matters.
asbestos claims and litigation
the company believes that the property and casualty insurance industry has suffered from court decisions and other trends that have
attempted to expand insurance coverage for asbestos claims far beyond the intent of insurers and policyholders. while the company has experienced a decrease in asbestos claims over the past several
years, the company continues to receive a significant number of asbestos claims from the company's policyholders (which includes others seeking coverage under a policy), including claims against the
company's policyholders by individuals who do not appear to be impaired by asbestos exposure. factors underlying these claim filings include intensive advertising by lawyers seeking asbestos claimants
and the focus by plaintiffs on previously peripheral defendants. the focus on these defendants is primarily the result of the number of traditional asbestos defendants who have sought bankruptcy
protection in previous years. in addition to contributing to the overall number of claims, bankruptcy proceedings may increase the volatility of asbestos-related losses by initially delaying the
reporting of claims and later by significantly accelerating and increasing loss payments by insurers, including the company. bankruptcy proceedings have also caused increased settlement demands
against those policyholders who are not in bankruptcy but that remain in the tort system. currently, in many jurisdictions, those who allege very serious injury and who can present credible medical
evidence of their injuries are receiving priority trial settings in the courts, while those who have not shown any credible disease manifestation are having their hearing dates delayed or placed on an
inactive docket. this trend of prioritizing claims involving credible evidence of injuries, along with the focus on previously peripheral defendants, contributes to the loss and loss expense payments
experienced by the company. the company's asbestos-related claims and claim adjustment expense experience also has been impacted by the unavailability of other insurance sources potentially available
to policyholders, whether through exhaustion of policy limits or through the insolvency of other participating insurers.
the
company continues to be involved in coverage litigation concerning a number of policyholders, some of whom have filed for bankruptcy, who in some instances have asserted that all or
a portion of their asbestos-related claims are not subject to aggregate limits on coverage. in these instances, policyholders also may assert that each individual bodily injury claim should be treated
as a separate occurrence under the policy. it is difficult to predict whether these policyholders will be successful on both issues. to the extent both issues are resolved in a policyholders' favor
and other company defenses are not successful, the company's coverage obligations under the policies at issue would be materially increased and bounded only by the applicable
per-occurrence limits and the number of asbestos bodily injury claims against the policyholders. accordingly, although the company has seen a moderation in the overall risk associated with
these lawsuits, it remains difficult to predict the ultimate cost of these claims.
many
coverage disputes with policyholders are only resolved through settlement agreements. because many policyholders make exaggerated demands, it is difficult to predict the outcome of
settlement negotiations. settlements involving bankrupt policyholders may include extensive releases which are favorable to the company but which could result in settlements for larger amounts than
originally anticipated. there also may be instances where a court may not approve a proposed settlement, which may result in additional litigation and potentially less beneficial outcomes for the
company. as in the past, the company will continue to pursue settlement opportunities.
on
july6, 2007, the company announced that it entered into a settlement to resolve fully all current and future asbestos-related coverage claims relating to acands,inc.
(acands), formerly a national distributor and installer of products containing asbestos. pursuant to that agreement, the company placed $449million into escrow. the settlement was subject to a
number of contingencies, all
table of contents
of
which have been fulfilled. on august6, 2008, the company's $449million settlement payment was released from the escrow to the acands trust. this transaction was recorded as a paid
claim and reduction in claim reserves, and accordingly, there was no effect on the company's results of operations. the company is seeking to recover approximately $84million of the
$449million from reinsurers; such a recovery would also have no effect on the company's results of operations.
in
addition to claims against policyholders, proceedings have been launched directly against insurers, including the company, by individuals challenging insurers' conduct with respect to
the handling of past asbestos claims and by individuals seeking damages arising from alleged asbestos-related bodily injuries. the company anticipates the filing of other direct actions against
insurers, including the company, in the future. it is difficult to predict the outcome of these proceedings, including whether the plaintiffs will be able to sustain these actions against insurers
based on novel legal theories of liability. the company believes it has meritorious defenses to these claims and has received favorable rulings in certain jurisdictions.
travelers
property casualty corp. (tpc), a wholly-owned subsidiary of the company, had entered into settlement agreements, which had been approved by the court in connection with the
proceedings initiated by tpc in the johns manville bankruptcy court. on march29, 2006, the u.s. district court for the southern district of new york substantially affirmed the bankruptcy
court's orders, while vacating that portion of the bankruptcy court's orders which required all future direct actions against tpc to first be approved by the bankruptcy court before proceeding in
state or federal court. various parties appealed the district court's march29, 2006 ruling to the u.s. court of appeals for the second circuit. on february15, 2008, the second circuit
issued an opinion vacating on jurisdictional grounds the district court's approval of an order issued by the bankruptcy court prohibiting the prosecution of the statutory and hawaii actions and the
common law claims, as well as future similar direct action litigation, against tpc. on february29, 2008, tpc and certain other parties to the appeals filed petitions for rehearing and/or
rehearing en banc, requesting reinstatement of the district court's judgment, which were denied. tpc and certain other parties filed petitions for writ
of certiorari in the united states supreme court seeking review of the second circuit's decision and on december12, 2008, the petitions were granted. unless the supreme court reverses the
second circuit's decision, and the bankruptcy court's order is reinstated and becomes final, the settlements will be voided and tpc will have no obligation to pay the amounts due under the settlement
agreements (other than certain administrative expenses). in that case, the company intends to litigate the direct action cases vigorously. (for a description of these matters, see
"partiitem3, legal proceedings").
because
each policyholder presents different liability and coverage issues, the company generally reviews the exposure presented by each policyholder at least annually. in the course of
this review, the company generally considers, among other factors: available insurance coverage, including the role of
any umbrella or excess insurance the company has issued to the policyholder; limits and deductibles; an analysis of the policyholder's potential liability; the jurisdictions involved; past and
anticipated future claim activity and loss development on pending claims; past settlement values of similar claims; allocated claim adjustment expense; potential role of other insurance; the role, if
any, of non-asbestos claims or potential non-asbestos claims in any resolution process; and applicable coverage defenses or determinations, if any, including the determination
as to whether or not an asbestos claim is a products/completed operation claim subject to an aggregate limit and the available coverage, if any, for that claim.
in
the third quarter of 2008, the company completed its annual in-depth asbestos claim review. the trends observed over the past three reviews have been generally consistent.
the trends include:
more stable payment trends for a large proportion of policyholders;
a decrease in the number of new claims received;
table of contents
a decrease in the number of large asbestos exposures confronting the company due to additional settlement activity;
fewer and less volatile asbestos-related bankruptcies; and
the absence of new theories of liability or new classes of defendants.
while
the company believes that these trends indicate a reduction in the volatility associated with the company's overall asbestos exposure, there nonetheless remains a high degree of
uncertainty with respect to future exposure from asbestos claims.
as
in prior years, the annual claim review considered active policyholders and litigation cases for potential product and "non-product" liability. the home office and field
office categories, which account for the vast majority of policyholders with active asbestos-related claims, again experienced an overall reduction in new claim filings in 2008. the number of
policyholders tendering asbestos claims for the first time was consistent with the number tendering claims in 2007. defense and indemnity costs in these categories remain at similar levels to what the
company has experienced in recent years due to the level of trial activity involving impaired individuals.
the
company's quarterly asbestos reserve review includes an analysis of exposure and claim payment patterns by policyholder category, as well as recent settlements, policyholder
bankruptcies, judicial rulings and legislative actions. developing payment trends among policyholders in the home office, field office and assumed and international categories are also analyzed. in
addition, the company reviews its historical gross and net loss and expense paid experience, year-by-year, to assess any emerging trends, fluctuations, or characteristics
suggested by the aggregate paid activity. for certain policyholders an estimate of the gross ultimate exposure for indemnity and related claim adjustment expense is determined, and for those
policyholders the company calculates, by each policy year, a ceded reinsurance projection based on any applicable facultative and treaty reinsurance, past ceded experience and reinsurance collections.
conventional actuarial methods are not utilized to establish asbestos reserves nor have the company's evaluations resulted in any way of determining a meaningful average asbestos defense or indemnity
payment.
net
asbestos losses and expenses paid in 2008 were $658million, compared with $317million in 2007. the increase in net paid losses was the result of the acands payment in
the third quarter of 2008. excluding the acands settlement, payments in 2008 were $293million. approximately 59% and 20% of total net paid losses in 2008 and 2007, respectively, related to
policyholders with whom the company had entered into settlement agreements limiting the company's liability.
the
company categorizes its asbestos reserves as follows:
number of policyholders
total net paid
net asbestos reserves
(at and for the year ended december31, $ in millions)
policyholders with settlement agreements
$
$
$
$
1,152
home office and field office
1,651
1,659
1,983
2,116
assumed reinsurance and other
international
total
1,674
1,681
$
$
$
2,914
$
3,734
the
"policyholders with settlement agreements" category includes structured settlements, coverage in place arrangements and, with respect to tpc, wellington accounts. reserves are based
on the expected payout for each policyholder under the applicable agreement. structured settlements are arrangements under which policyholders and/or plaintiffs agree to fixed financial amounts to be
paid at scheduled times. included in this category are tpc's settlements of the statutory and hawaii actions
table of contents
and
the common law claims (collectively the direct action settlement). as stated above unless the second circuit's decision vacating the approval of the settlement is reversed and the bankruptcy
court's order approving the settlement is reinstated and becomes final, the direct action settlement will be voided and tpc will have no obligation to pay the amounts under the direct action
settlement (other than certain administrative expenses). in that event, the reserves assigned to the settlement will be returned to tpc's unallocated asbestos reserve. (for a description of these
matters, see "item3legal proceedings"). coverage in place arrangements represent agreements with major policyholders on specified amounts of coverage to be provided. payment
obligations may be subject to annual maximums and are only made when valid claims are presented. wellington accounts refer to the 35 defendants that are parties to a 1985 agreement settling certain
disputes concerning insurance coverage for their asbestos claims. many of the aspects of the wellington agreement are similar to those of coverage in place arrangements in which the parties have
agreed on specific amounts of coverage and the terms under which the coverage can be accessed.
the
"home office and field office" category relates to all other policyholders and also includes unallocated ibnr reserves. policyholders are identified for home office review based
upon, among other factors: a combination of past payments and current case reserves in excess of a specified threshold (currently $100,000), perceived level of exposure, number of reported claims,
products/completed operations and potential "non-product" exposures, size of policyholder and geographic distribution of products or services sold by the policyholder. in addition to ibnr
amounts contained in the reserves for home office and field office policyholders and the costs of litigating asbestos coverage matters, the company has established a reserve for further adverse
development related to existing policyholders, new claims from policyholders reporting claims for the
first time and policyholders for which there is, or may be, litigation and direct actions against the company.
on
january29, 2009, the company and ppg industries, inc ("ppg"), along with approximately 30 other insurers of ppg, agreed in principle on a modified settlement agreement to
settle asbestos-related coverage litigation under insurance policies issued to ppg. the tentative settlement agreement has been incorporated into the modified third amended plan of reorganization
("amended plan") proposed as part of the pittsburgh corning corp. ("pcc", which is 50% owned by ppg) bankruptcy proceeding. pursuant to the proposed amended plan, which was filed on january30,
2009, pcc, along with enumerated other companies (including ppg as well as the company as a participating insurer), are to receive protections afforded by section524(g) of the bankruptcy code
from certain asbestos-related bodily injury claims. the company had entered into a prior agreement in principle with ppg in 2002 which was contingent upon final court approval of the second amended
plan of reorganization for pcc, but in december 2006, the united states bankruptcy court declined to confirm that plan of reorganization. as a result of the december 2006 ruling, the company removed
the reserves associated with the prior agreement from the structured settlement category of the asbestos reserve and made a corresponding increase in the unallocated asbestos ibnr reserve. under the
current agreement in principle, the company has the option to make a series of payments over the next 20years totaling approximately $620million to the trust to be created under the
amended plan, or it may elect to make a one-time discounted payment, which, as of june30, 2009, would total approximately $430million (approximately $400million
after reinsurance). the current agreement in principle with ppg is subject to numerous contingencies, including final court approval of the amended plan, and the company has no obligation to make the
settlement payment until all contingencies are satisfied. the company's obligations under this agreement in principle continue to be included in the unallocated asbestos ibnr reserve.
assumed
reinsurance exposure primarily consists of reinsurance of excess coverage, including various pool participations. prior to the sale of unionamerica in december 2008,
international was exposed to u.s. asbestos liabilities through participations in excess insurance policies, quota share and excess of loss reinsurance policies, and retrocession policies, underwritten
in the london insurance
table of contents
market.
details of exposures under the reinsurance and retrocession policies were identified only when the company was advised by the cedant.
in
december 2008, the company completed the sale of unionamerica, which comprised its united kingdom-based runoff insurance and reinsurance businesses. included in the claim and claim
adjustment expense reserves transferred to the purchaser were gross and net asbestos reserves of $330million and $232million, respectively.
the
company recorded a $70million pretax increase to asbestos reserves in 2008. the company recorded no asbestos reserve additions in 2007, and recorded a pretax asbestos reserve
addition of $155million in 2006. the 2008 increase was driven by a change in the estimated costs associated with
litigating asbestos coverage matters and a change in estimated losses for certain individual policyholders. the increase was not a result of a change in the company's assessment of the underlying
asbestos environment. approximately half of the $155million 2006 pretax reserve adjustment was due to an increase in the projected defense costs for ten policyholders. the majority of the
remainder of the reserve adjustment was primarily due to continued litigation activity against smaller, peripheral defendants. net asbestos reserves totaled $2.91billion at december31,
2008, compared with $3.73billion at december31, 2007.
the
following table displays activity for asbestos losses and loss expenses and reserves:
(at and for the year ended december31, in millions)
beginning reserves:
direct
$
4,353
$
4,777
$
5,103
ceded
(619
)
(726
)
(739
)
net
3,734
4,051
4,364
incurred losses and loss expenses:
direct
(1
)
ceded
(41
)
net
accretion of discount:
direct
ceded
net
losses paid:
direct
ceded
(136
)
(106
)
(54
)
net
sale of subsidiary:
direct
ceded
(98
)
net
ending reserves:
direct
3,299
4,353
4,777
ceded
(385
)
(619
)
(726
)
net
$
2,914
$
3,734
$
4,051
see
"uncertainty regarding adequacy of asbestos and environmental reserves."
table of contents
environmental claims and litigation
the company continues to receive claims from policyholders who allege that they are liable for injury or damage arising out of their
alleged disposition of toxic substances. mostly, these claims are due to various legislative as well as regulatory efforts aimed at environmental remediation. for instance, the comprehensive
environmental response, compensation and liability act (cercla), enacted in 1980 and later modified, enables private parties as well as federal and state governments to take action with respect to
releases and threatened releases of hazardous substances. this federal statute permits the recovery of response costs from some liable parties and may require liable parties to undertake their own
remedial action. liability under cercla may be joint and several with other responsible parties.
the
company has been, and continues to be, involved in litigation involving insurance coverage issues pertaining to environmental claims. the company believes that some court decisions
have interpreted the insurance coverage to be broader than the original intent of the insurers and policyholders. these decisions often pertain to insurance policies that were issued by the company
prior to the mid-1980s. these decisions continue to be inconsistent and vary from jurisdiction to jurisdiction. environmental claims when submitted rarely indicate the monetary amount
being sought by
the claimant from the policyholder, and the company does not keep track of the monetary amount being sought in those few claims which indicate a monetary amount.
the
resolution of environmental exposures by the company generally occurs by settlement on a policyholder-by-policyholder basis as opposed to a
claim-by-claim basis. generally, the company strives to extinguish any obligations it may have under any policy issued to the policyholder for past, present and future
environmental liabilities and extinguish any pending coverage litigation dispute with the policyholder. this form of settlement is commonly referred to as a "buy-back" of policies for
future environmental liability. in addition, many of the agreements have also extinguished any insurance obligation which the company may have for other claims, including but not limited to asbestos
and other cumulative injury claims. the company and its policyholders may also agree to settlements which extinguish any liability arising from known specified sites or claims. these agreements also
include appropriate indemnities and hold harmless provisions to protect the company. the company's general purpose in executing these agreements is to reduce the company's potential environmental
exposure and eliminate the risks presented by coverage litigation with the policyholder and related costs.
in
establishing environmental reserves, the company evaluates the exposure presented by each policyholder and the anticipated cost of resolution, if any. in the course of this analysis,
the company generally considers the probable liability, available coverage, relevant judicial interpretations and historical value of similar exposures. in addition, the company considers the many
variables presented, such as the nature of the alleged activities of the policyholder at each site; the allegations of environmental harm at each site; the number of sites; the total number of
potentially responsible parties at each site; the nature of environmental harm and the corresponding remedy at each site; the nature of government enforcement activities at each site; the ownership
and general use of each site; the overall nature of the insurance relationship between the company and the policyholder, including the role of any umbrella or excess insurance the company has issued
to the policyholder; the involvement of other insurers; the potential for other available coverage, including the number of years of coverage; the role, if any, of non-environmental claims
or potential non-environmental claims in any resolution process; and the applicable law in each jurisdiction. conventional actuarial techniques are not used to estimate these reserves.
in
its review of environmental reserves, the company considers: past settlement payments; changing judicial and legislative trends; its reserves for the costs of litigating environmental
coverage matters; the potential for policyholders with smaller exposures to be named in new clean-up actions for
table of contents
both
on- and off-site waste disposal activities; the potential for adverse development; the potential for additional new claims beyond previous expectations; and the potential
higher costs for new settlements.
the
duration of the company's investigation and review of these claims and the extent of time necessary to determine an appropriate estimate, if any, of the value of the claim to the
company vary significantly and are dependent upon a number of factors. these factors include, but are not limited to, the cooperation of the policyholder in providing claim information, the pace of
underlying litigation or claim processes, the pace of coverage litigation between the policyholder and the company and the willingness of the policyholder and the company to negotiate, if appropriate,
a resolution of any dispute pertaining to these claims. because these factors vary from claim-to-claim and policyholder-by-policyholder, the company
cannot provide a meaningful average of the duration of an environmental claim. however, based upon the company's experience in resolving these claims, the duration may vary from months to several
years.
the
company continues to receive notices from policyholders tendering claims for the first time. these policyholders generally present smaller exposures, have fewer sites and are lower
tier defendants. further, in many instances clean-up costs have been reduced because regulatory agencies are willing to accept risk-based site analyses and more efficient
clean-up technologies. however, the company has experienced upward development in the anticipated defense and settlement costs for certain of its pending policyholders. as a result of this
development, the company increased its environmental reserve by $85million in the second quarter of 2008. the company continues to experience a decline in both the number of new policyholders
tendering claims for the first time and the number of pending lawsuits between the company and its policyholders pertaining to coverage for environmental claims; however, the company has experienced a
moderation in the rate of that decline in recent years. the company increased its environmental reserve by $185million in 2007 primarily in response to that moderation. in 2006, the company
increased environmental reserves by $120million primarily as a result of higher than expected defense and settlement costs driven in part by adverse judicial developments in certain states
regarding the availability of coverage for environmental claims.
in
december 2008, the company completed the sale of unionamerica, which comprised its united kingdom-based runoff insurance and reinsurance businesses. included in the claim and claim
adjustment expense reserves transferred to the purchaser were gross and net environmental reserves of $40million and $33million, respectively.
net
paid losses in 2008 and 2007 were $128million and $113million, respectively. at december31, 2008, approximately 92% of the net environmental reserve
(approximately $381million) was carried in a bulk reserve and included unresolved environmental claims, incurred but not reported environmental claims and the anticipated cost of coverage
litigation disputes relating to these claims. the bulk reserve the company carries is established and adjusted based upon the aggregate volume of in-process environmental claims and the
company's experience in resolving those claims. the balance, approximately 8% of the net environmental reserve (approximately $33million), consists of case reserves.
table of contents
the
following table displays activity for environmental losses and loss expenses and reserves:
(at and for the year ended december31, in millions)
beginning reserves:
direct
$
$
$
ceded
(69
)
net
incurred losses and loss expenses:
direct
ceded
net
losses paid:
direct
ceded
(4
)
(62
)
net
sale of subsidiary:
direct
ceded
(7
)
net
ending reserves:
direct
ceded
net
$
$
$
uncertainty regarding adequacy of asbestos and environmental reserves
as a result of the processes and procedures described above, management believes that the reserves carried for asbestos and
environmental claims at december31, 2008 are appropriately established based upon known facts, current law and management's judgment. however, the uncertainties surrounding the final
resolution of these claims continue, and it is difficult to determine the ultimate exposure for asbestos and environmental claims and related litigation. as a result, these reserves are subject to
revision as new information becomes available and as claims develop. the continuing uncertainties include, without limitation, the risks and lack of predictability inherent in complex litigation, any
impact from the bankruptcy protection sought by various asbestos producers and other asbestos defendants, a further increase or decrease in asbestos and environmental claims beyond that which is
anticipated, the role of any umbrella or excess policies the company has issued, the resolution or adjudication of disputes pertaining to the amount of available coverage for asbestos and
environmental claims in a manner inconsistent with the company's previous assessment of these claims, the number and outcome of direct actions against the company, future developments pertaining to
the company's ability to recover reinsurance for asbestos and environmental claims and the unavailability of other insurance sources potentially available to policyholders, whether through exhaustion
of policy limits or through the insolvency of other participating insurers. in addition, uncertainties arise from the insolvency or bankruptcy of policyholders and other defendants, although in recent
years the company has noted a decrease in the number and volatility of asbestos-related bankruptcies. it is also not possible to predict changes in the legal, regulatory and legislative environment
and their impact on the future development of asbestos and environmental claims. this development will be affected by future court and regulatory decisions and interpretations, as well as changes in
applicable legislation. it is also difficult to predict the ultimate outcome of complex coverage disputes until settlement negotiations
table of contents
near
completion and significant legal questions are resolved or, failing settlement, until the dispute is adjudicated. this is particularly the case with policyholders in bankruptcy where negotiations
often involve a large number of claimants and other parties and require court approval to be effective. as part of its continuing analysis of asbestos and environmental reserves, the company continues
to study the implications of these and other developments. (also, see "partiitem3, legal proceedings").
because
of the uncertainties set forth above, additional liabilities may arise for amounts in excess of the current related reserves. in addition, the company's estimate of claims and
claim adjustment expenses may change. these additional liabilities or increases in estimates, or a range of either, cannot now be reasonably estimated and could result in income statement charges that
could be material to the company's operating results in future periods.
investment portfolio
the company's invested assets at december31, 2008 totaled $70.74billion, of which 94% was invested in fixed maturity
and short-term investments, 1% in equity securities, 1% in real estate and 4% in other investments. because the primary purpose of the investment portfolio is to fund future claims
payments, the company employs a conservative investment philosophy. a significant majority of funds available for investment are deployed in a widely diversified portfolio of high quality, liquid
intermediate-term taxable u.s. government, tax-exempt u.s. municipal bonds, and taxable corporate and u.s. agency mortgage-backed bonds.
the
company's fixed maturity portfolio at december31, 2008 totaled $61.28billion. the company closely monitors the duration of its fixed maturity investments, and
investment purchases and sales are executed with the objective of having adequate funds available to satisfy the company's insurance and debt obligations. the weighted average credit quality of the
company's fixed maturity portfolio, both including and excluding u.s. treasury securities, was "aa1" at december31, 2008 and 2007. below investment grade securities represented 2.0% and 2.5%
of the total fixed maturity investment portfolio at december31, 2008 and 2007, respectively. the average effective duration of the fixed maturity portfolio, including short-term
investments, was 4.2 and 4.0 (4.6 and 4.3 excluding short-term investments), at december31, 2008 and 2007, respectively.
the
following table sets forth the company's combined fixed maturity investment portfolio rated using external ratings agencies or by the company when a public rating does not exist:
(at december31, 2008, in millions)
carrying
value
percent of total
carrying value
quality rating:
aaa
$
30,878
50.4
%
aa
20,282
33.1
a
6,030
9.8
baa
2,883
4.7
total investment grade
60,073
98.0
below investment grade
1,202
2.0
total fixed maturity investments
$
61,275
100.0
%
included
in the company's fixed maturity portfolio at december31, 2008 were $1.52billion of debt securities issued by foreign governments and $12.79billion of
corporate fixed maturities and
table of contents
redeemable
preferred stock. these credit exposures are diversified across a number of countries and industries. the following table shows the industry sectors for those exposures.
(at december31, 2008, in millions)
carrying
value
average
credit rating
credit sector(1)
government:
debt securities issued by foreign governments
$
1,519
aaa
corporate:
financial
bank
1,821
aa3
insurance
aa3
brokerage and asset management
a2
finance/leasing
a3
total financial
2,789
industrial
4,972
baa1
public utility
1,956
baa1
sovereign corporate securities(2)
1,341
aaa
commercial mortgage-backed and project loans(3)
aaa
canadian municipal securities
aa1
asset-backed and other
a1
total corporate
12,794
total credit exposure
$
14,313
a1
(1)credit
sectors include debt securities issued by foreign governments, corporate bonds and redeemable preferred stocks.
(2)sovereign
corporate securities include corporate securities that are backed by a government and include sovereign banks and securities issued under the
temporary liquidity guaranty and the federal ship financing programs.
(3)included
in commercial mortgage-backed securities and project loans are $221million of securities guaranteed by the u.s. government and
$37million by government sponsored enterprises.
the
company's fixed maturity investment portfolio at december31, 2008 included $39.06billion of securities which are obligations of states, municipalities and political
subdivisions (collectively referred to as the municipal bond portfolio). the municipal bond portfolio is diversified across the united states, the district of columbia and puerto rico, and includes
general obligation and revenue bonds issued by states, cities, counties, school districts, and similar issuers. included in the municipal bond portfolio are $5.45billion of advance refunded or
escrowed-to-maturity bonds. advance refunded and escrowed-to-maturity bonds are bonds for which an irrevocable trust has been established to fund the
remaining payments of principal and interest. such escrow accounts are verified as to their sufficiency by an external auditor and almost exclusively involve u.s. treasury securities. the following
table of contents
table
shows the geographic distribution of the remaining $33.61billion of municipal bonds which are not advance refunded or escrowed-to-maturity.
state (in millions)
state
general
obligation
local
general
obligation
revenue
total
market
value
average
quality
rating(1)
texas
$
$
1,988
$
1,362
$
3,729
aaa/aa1
california
1,472
1,992
aa1
illinois
1,947
aa1
virginia
1,609
aaa/aa1
florida
1,548
aa1
washington
1,502
aa1
maryland
1,322
aaa/aa1
ohio
1,255
aa1
minnesota
1,244
aaa/aa1
georgia
1,208
aaa/aa1
new york
1,170
aa1
arizona
1,081
aa1
north carolina
1,076
aaa
michigan
1,024
aa1
all others(2)
3,255
3,509
5,135
11,899
aa1
total
$
7,845
$
12,772
$
12,989
$
33,606
aa1
(1)rated
using external ratings agencies or by the company when a public rating does not exist. ratings shown are the higher of the rating of the underlying
issuer or the insurer in the case of securities enhanced by third-party insurance for the payment of principal and interest in the event of issuer default.
(2)no
other single state accounted for 3.0% or more of the total non-advance-refunded or escrowed-to-maturity municipal
bonds.
the
company bases its investment decision on the credit characteristics of the municipal security; however, within its municipal bond portfolio are a number of securities that were
enhanced by third-party insurance for the payment of principal and interest in the event of an issuer default. the downgrade during 2008 of credit ratings of insurers of these securities has resulted
in a corresponding downgrade in the ratings of the securities to the underlying rating of the respective security. of the insured municipal securities in the company's investment portfolio,
approximately 99% were rated at a3 or above, and approximately 81% were rated at aa3 or above, without the benefit of insurance. the company believes that a further loss of the benefit of insurance
would not result in a material adverse impact on the company's results of operations, financial position or liquidity, due to the underlying credit strength of the issuers of the securities, as well
as the company's ability and intent to hold the securities. the average credit rating of the underlying issuers of these securities was "aa3" at december31, 2008. the average credit rating of
the entire municipal bond portfolio was "aa1" at december31, 2008 with and without the third-party insurance.
at
december31, 2008 and 2007, the company held commercial mortgage-backed securities (cmbs, including fha project loans) of $766million and $935million,
respectively. at december31, 2008, approximately $258million of these securities, or the loans backing such securities, contain guarantees by the united states government or a
government-sponsored enterprise and $20million were comprised of canadian non-guaranteed securities. the average credit rating of the $508million of
non-guaranteed securities at december31, 2008 was "aaa," and 93% of those securities were issued in 2004 and prior years. the cmbs portfolio is supported by loans that are
diversified across economic
table of contents
sectors
and geographical areas. the company does not believe this portfolio exposes it to a material adverse impact on its results of operations, financial position or liquidity, due to the underlying
credit strength of these securities.
the
company makes investments in residential collateralized mortgage obligations (cmos) that typically have high credit quality, offer good liquidity and are expected to provide an
advantage in yield compared to u.s. treasury securities. the company's investment strategy is to purchase cmo tranches which offer the most favorable return given the risks involved. one significant
risk evaluated is prepayment sensitivity. while prepayment risk (either shortening or lengthening of duration) and its effect on total return cannot be fully controlled, particularly when interest
rates move dramatically, the investment process generally favors securities that control this risk within expected interest rate ranges. the company does invest in other types of cmo tranches if a
careful assessment indicates a favorable risk/return tradeoff. the company does not purchase residual interests in cmos.
at
december31, 2008 and 2007, the company held cmos classified as available for sale with a fair value of $2.84billion and $3.59billion, respectively (in addition
to the cmbs securities of $766million and $935million, respectively, described above). approximately 35% and 31% of the company's cmo holdings are guaranteed by or fully collateralized
by securities issued by gnma, fnma or fhlmc at december31, 2008 and 2007, respectively. in addition, the company held $3.22billion and $3.52billion of gnma, fnma, fhlmc
(excluding fha project loans which are included with cmbs) mortgage-backed pass-through securities classified as available for sale at december31, 2008 and 2007, respectively. the
average credit rating of all of the above securities was "aaa" at both dates.
the
company's fixed maturity investment portfolio at december31, 2008 and 2007 included asset-backed securities collateralized by sub-prime mortgages and
collateralized mortgage obligations backed by alternative documentation mortgages with a collective market value of $206million and $286million, respectively (comprising approximately
0.3% and 0.4% of the company's total fixed maturity investments, respectively). the disruption in secondary investment markets for mortgage-backed securities provided the company with the opportunity
to selectively acquire additional asset-backed securities collateralized by sub-prime mortgages at discounted prices. the company purchased $47million and $89million of
such securities in 2008 and the fourth quarter of 2007, respectively. the company defines sub-prime mortgage-backed securities as investments in which the underlying loans primarily
exhibit one or more of the following characteristics: low fico scores, above-prime interest rates, high loan-to-value ratios or high debt-to-income
ratios. alternative documentation securitizations are those in which the underlying loans primarily meet the government-sponsored entity's requirements for credit score but do not meet the
government-sponsored entity's guidelines for documentation, property type, debt and loan-to-value ratios. the average credit rating on these securities and obligations held by
the company was "aa2" and "aaa" at december31, 2008 and 2007, respectively. approximately $81million of the company's asset-backed securities collateralized by sub-prime
and alternative documentation mortgages were downgraded in 2008.
the
company's real estate investments include warehouses and office buildings and other commercial land and properties that are directly owned. the company's other investments are
primarily comprised of private equity limited partnerships, hedge funds, real estate partnerships, joint ventures, mortgage loans, venture capital (through direct ownership and limited partnerships)
and trading securities, which are subject to more volatility than the company's fixed maturity investments. while these asset classes have historically provided a higher return than fixed maturities,
in 2008 the returns were significantly lower than in prior periods and, in the aggregate, produced negative investment income, reflecting market conditions. at december31, 2008 and 2007, the
carrying value of the company's other investments was $3.04billion and $3.37billion, respectively.
table of contents
the
company has engaged in securities lending activities from which it generates net investment income from the lending of certain of its investments to other institutions for short
periods of time.
borrowers of these securities provide collateral equal to at least 102% of the market value of the loaned securities plus accrued interest. this collateral is held by a third-party custodian, and the
company has the right to access the collateral only in the event that the institution borrowing the company's securities is in default under the lending agreement. therefore, the company does not
recognize the receipt of the collateral held by the third-party custodian or the obligation to return the collateral. the loaned securities remain a recorded asset of the company.
during
the third quarter of 2008, the company changed its securities lending requirements in light of the recent market conditions to accept only cash as collateral for securities on
loan and restricted the manner in which that cash was invested. these actions resulted in a significant reduction in the amount of securities on loan. at december31, 2008, the company had
$8million of securities on loan to others, compared with $1.99billion at december31, 2007. the company has not incurred any investment losses in its securities lending program
for the years ended december31, 2008, 2007 and 2006.
the
net unrealized investment gains (losses) that were included as a separate component of accumulated other changes in equity from nonowner sources were as follows:
(for the year ended december31, in millions)
fixed maturities
$
(294
)
$
$
equity securities
(82
)
venture capital
other investments
unrealized investment gains (losses) before tax
(253
)
tax expense (benefit)
(109
)
net unrealized investment gains (losses) at end of year
$
(144
)
$
$
net
pretax unrealized investment losses totaled $253million at december31, 2008, compared with net pretax unrealized investment gains of $938million at
december31, 2007. the net unrealized loss position at december31, 2008 reflected the impact of rising interest rates on longer-dated fixed maturity securities (primarily due to the
widening of credit spreads generally), as well as net unrealized investment losses on equity securities, which reflected current market conditions.
net
pretax unrealized investment gains at december31, 2007 increased by $258million over year-end 2006, primarily driven by the fixed maturity portfolio. the
increase in net unrealized investment gains on fixed maturities was primarily driven by the impact of declining market interest rates on both taxable and tax-exempt securities, which were
partially offset by an increase in credit spreads and a decrease in unrealized investment gains in the venture capital portfolio, primarily due to sale activities. in may 2007, the company completed a
bundled sale of a substantial portion of its venture capital portfolio, which resulted in the realization of $81million of previously unrealized net investment gains.
table of contents
impairment charges included in net realized investment gains (losses) were as follows:
(for the year ended december31, in millions)
fixed maturities
$
$
$
equity securities
other investments
total
$
$
$
for
the year ended december31, 2008, the company recognized the following other-than-temporary impairments:
$324million in the fixed maturities portfolio, consisting of $210million related to the deteriorated
financial position of various issuers (of which $70million related to securities issued by lehman brothers holdings,inc. and its subsidiaries), $81million related to externally
managed securities with respect to which the company does not have the ability to assert an intention to hold until recovery in market value and $33million resulting from the intent or
potential to sell various holdings prior to a recovery in market value;
$74million in the equity portfolio consisting of $26million related to externally managed securities with
respect to which the company does not have the ability to assert an intention to hold until recovery in market value, $26million related to securities with respect to which it was determined
that the cost basis of those securities would not be recovered over the expected holding period and $22million resulting from the intent or potential to sell prior to a recovery in market
value;
$14million in the venture capital portfolio on 16 holdings, consisting of $6million related to six
holdings which were externally managed securities with respect to which the company does not have the ability to assert an intention to hold until recovery in market value and ten holdings which
experienced fundamental economic deterioration; and
$8million in other investments of which $6million related to the fundamental decline in the financial
condition of a privately-held investment and $2million resulted from the intent or potential to sell prior to a recovery in market value.
for
the year ended december31, 2007, the company recognized the following other-than-temporary impairments:
$37million in the fixed maturities portfolio, consisting of $23million related to externally managed
securities with respect to which the company does not have the ability to assert an intention to hold until recovery in market value, and $14million related to credit risk associated with
various issuers' deteriorated financial position;
$7million in the equity portfolio related to externally managed securities with respect to which the company does
not have the ability to assert an intention to hold until recovery in market value;
$10million in the real estate portfolio, related to the fundamental decline in the financial condition of one real
estate development property; and
$16million in the venture capital portfolio on 14 holdings. three of the holdings were public securities whose
cost basis was not anticipated to be recovered over the expected holding period. nine holdings experienced fundamental economic deterioration (characterized by less than expected revenues or a
fundamental change in product). the remaining two holdings were impaired due to the impending sale, liquidation or shutdown of the entity.
table of contents
for
the year ended december31, 2006, the company recognized the following other-than-temporary impairments:
$7million in the fixed maturities portfolio, consisting of $6million related to externally managed
securities with respect to which the company does not have the ability to assert an intention to hold until recovery in market value and $1million related to credit risk associated with
various issuers' deteriorated financial position;
$4million in the equity portfolio when it was determined that the cost basis of those securities would not be
recovered over the expected holding period;
$33million in the venture capital portfolio on 16 holdings. four of the holdings were impaired due to new
financings on unfavorable terms. six holdings experienced fundamental economic deterioration (characterized by less than expected revenues or a fundamental change in product). four of the holdings
were impaired due to the impending sale, liquidation or shutdown of the entity. two of the holdings were public securities whose cost basis was not anticipated to be recovered over the expected
holding period; and
$4million in other investments (excluding venture capital). the loss recorded was the result of one mortgage loan
refinancing at less favorable terms.
the
market disruptions that occurred in the second half of 2008 led to many of the 2008 impairment losses and resulted in increased unrealized losses compared with previous years. the
company continually evaluates current developments in the market that have the potential to affect the valuation of the company's investments.
the
following table summarizes, for all fixed maturities and equity securities available for sale and for equity securities reported at fair value for which fair value is less than 80%
of amortized cost at december31, 2008, the gross unrealized investment loss by length of time those securities have continuously been in an unrealized loss position of greater than 20% of
amortized cost:
period for which fair value is less than 80% of amortized cost
(in millions)
less than
3 months
greater than
3 months,
less than
6 months
greater than
6 months,
less than
12 months
greater than
12 months
total
fixed maturities:
mortgage-backed securities
$
$
$
$
$
other
total fixed maturities
equity securities
total
$
$
$
$
$
these
unrealized losses at december31, 2008 represent approximately 1% of the combined fixed maturity and equity security portfolios on a pretax basis and approximately 2% of
shareholders' equity on an after-tax basis.
for
fixed maturity investments where fair value is less than the carrying value and the company did not reach a decision to impair, the company continues to have the intent and ability
to hold such investments to a projected recovery in value, which may not be until maturity.
at
december31, 2008, below investment grade securities comprised 2.0% of the company's fixed maturity investment portfolio. included in below investment grade securities at
december31, 2008 were securities in an unrealized loss position that, in the aggregate, had an amortized cost of $1.34billion and a fair value of $1.08billion, resulting in a
net pretax unrealized investment loss of
table of contents
$258million.
these securities in an unrealized loss position represented approximately 2% of both the total amortized cost and the fair value of the fixed maturity portfolio at
december31, 2008. these securities accounted for 15% of the total pretax unrealized investment loss in the fixed maturity portfolio at december31, 2008.
following
are the pretax realized losses on investments sold during the year ended december31, 2008:
(in millions)
loss
fair value
fixed maturities
$
$
2,735
equity securities
total
$
$
2,752
purchases
and sales of investments are based on cash requirements, the characteristics of the insurance liabilities and current market conditions. the company identifies investments to
be sold to achieve its primary investment goals of assuring the company's ability to meet policyholder obligations as well as to optimize investment returns, given these obligations.
catastrophe modeling
the company uses various analyses and methods, including computer modeling techniques, to analyze catastrophic events and the risks
associated with them. the company uses these analyses and methods to make underwriting and reinsurance decisions designed to manage its exposure to catastrophic events.
in
making underwriting and reinsurance decisions, for hurricane and earthquake exposures, the company uses third-party proprietary computer modeling in an attempt to estimate the
likelihood that the loss from a single event occurring in a one-year timeframe will equal or exceed a particular amount. the tables below set forth the estimated probabilities that losses from a
single event occurring in a one-year timeframe will equal or exceed the indicated loss amounts (expressed in dollars and as a percentage of the company's common equity). for example, on the basis
described below the tables, the company estimates that there is a one percent chance that the company's loss from a single u.s.
hurricane occurring in a one-year timeframe would equal or exceed $1.3billion, or 5percent of the company's common equity at december31, 2008.
dollars (in billions)
likelihood of exceedance(1)
single
hurricane
single
earthquake
2.0% (1-in-50)
$
1.1
$
0.4
1.0% (1-in-100)
$
1.3
$
0.6
0.4% (1-in-250)
$
2.1
$
0.9
0.1% (1-in-1,000)
$
4.8
$
2.1
table of contents
percentage of
common equity
likelihood of exceedance
single
hurricane
single
earthquake
2.0% (1-in-50)
%
%
1.0% (1-in-100)
%
%
0.4% (1-in-250)
%
%
0.1% (1-in-1,000)
%
%
(1)an
event that has, for example, a 2% likelihood of exceedance is sometimes described as a "1-in-50year event." as noted
above, however, the probabilities in the table represent the likelihood of losses from a single event equaling or exceeding the indicated threshold loss amount in a one-year timeframe, not over a
multi-year timeframe. also, because the probabilities relate to a single event, the probabilities do not address the likelihood of more than one event occurring in a particular period,
and, therefore, the amounts do not address potential aggregate catastrophe losses occurring in a one-year timeframe.
the
threshold loss amounts in the tables above are net of reinsurance, after-tax and exclude loss adjustment expense, which historically has been less than 10% of loss estimates. the
amounts for hurricanes reflect u.s. exposures and include property exposures, other than offshore energy and marine exposures, property residual market exposures and an adjustment for certain
non-property exposures. the amounts for earthquakes reflect u.s. and canadian exposures and include property exposures and workers' compensation exposures. the company does not believe that the
inclusion of hurricane or earthquake losses arising from other geographical areas or other exposures would materially change the estimated threshold loss amounts. this information in the tables is
based on the company's in-force portfolio and catastrophic reinsurance program as of december31, 2008.
catastrophe
modeling requires a significant amount of judgment and a number of assumptions and relies upon inputs based on experience, science, engineering and history. as a result, such
models may fail to account for risks that are outside the range of normal probability or that are otherwise unforeseeable. catastrophe modeling assumptions include, among others, the portion of
purchased reinsurance that is collectible after a catastrophic event, which may prove to be materially incorrect. consequently, catastrophe modeling estimates are subject to significant uncertainty.
in the tables above, the uncertainty associated with the estimated threshold loss amounts increases significantly as the likelihood of exceedance decreases. in other words, in the case of a relatively
more remote event (e.g., 1-in-1000), the estimated threshold loss amount is relatively less reliable. actual losses from an event could materially exceed the indicated threshold loss amount. in
addition, more than one such event could occur in any period.
moreover,
the company is exposed to the risk of material losses from other than property and workers' compensation coverages arising out of hurricanes and earthquakes, and it is exposed
to catastrophe losses from perils other than hurricanes and earthquakes, for example, floods, tornadoes and acts of terrorism.
there
are no industry-standard methodologies or assumptions for projecting catastrophe exposure. accordingly, catastrophe estimates provided by different insurers may not be comparable.
for
more information about the company's exposure to catastrophe losses, see "item1arisk factorscatastrophe losses could materially and adversely affect
our results of operations, our financial position and/or liquidity, and could adversely impact our ratings, our ability to raise capital and the availability and cost of reinsurance."
table of contents
reinsurance recoverables
ceded reinsurance involves credit risk, except with regard to mandatory pools, and is generally subject to aggregate loss limits.
although the reinsurer is liable to the company to the extent of the reinsurance ceded, the company remains liable as the direct insurer on all risks reinsured. reinsurance recoverables are reported
after reductions for known insolvencies and after allowances for uncollectible amounts. the company also holds collateral, including trust agreements, escrow funds and letters of credit, under certain
reinsurance agreements. the company monitors the financial condition of reinsurers on an ongoing basis and reviews its reinsurance arrangements periodically. reinsurers are selected based on their
financial condition, business practices and the price of their product offerings. after reinsurance is purchased, the company has limited ability to manage the credit risk to a reinsurer. in addition,
in a number of jurisdictions, particularly the european union and the united kingdom, a reinsurer is permitted to transfer a reinsurance arrangement to another reinsurer, which may be less
creditworthy, without a counterparty's consent, provided that the transfer has been approved by the applicable regulatory and/or court authority.
the
company's reinsurance recoverables totaled $14.23billion at december31, 2008, a decline of $1.41billion from year-end 2007, primarily reflecting
the sale of unionamerica, various commutation agreements and collections on reinsurance recoverables, including those related to prior years' hurricane losses.
the
company has also entered into master security agreements with certain reinsurers. these agreements define conditions that require the reinsurer to provide collateral. the specific
conditions and the amounts and form of collateral to be provided by these agreements vary based on a number of factors including, but not limited to, the reinsurers' legal structure and trading
history with the company. one such agreement has been reached with xl re america, a member of xl capital group. in addition, the company is beneficiary under a trust arrangement with xl re america
which partially covers reinsurance recoverables from xl re america at december31, 2008.
the
following table presents the company's top five reinsurer groups by reinsurance recoverable at december31, 2008 (in millions). also included is thea.m. best rating of
each reinsurer group at february19, 2009:
reinsurer group
reinsurance recoverable
a.m. best rating of group's predominant reinsurer
swiss re group
$
1,009
a+
second highest of 16 ratings
munich re group
a+
second highest of 16 ratings
berkshire hathaway group
a++
highest of 16 ratings
transatlantic holdings,inc.(1)
a
third highest of 16 ratings
xl capital group
a
third highest of 16 ratings
(1)as
a result of the september29, 2008 announcement that a special committee of transatlantic holdings,inc.'s (trh) independent directors is
evaluating proposals received from american international group,inc. (aig) relating to the possible disposition of aig's 59% common stock interest in trh, as well as possible business
combination transactions involving trh's outstanding shares, the reinsurance recoverables from trh are now being reported separately. these amounts were previously reported combined with the
reinsurance recoverables from aig (totaling $71million at december31, 2008 exclusive of trh).
at
december31, 2008, $2.56billion of reinsurance recoverables were collateralized by letters of credit, trust agreements and funds held.
included
in reinsurance recoverables are certain amounts related to structured settlements. structured settlements comprise annuities purchased from various life insurance companies to
settle
table of contents
certain
personal physical injury claims, of which workers' compensation claims comprise a significant portion. in cases where the company did not receive a release from the claimant, the structured
settlement is included in reinsurance recoverables as the company retains the contingent liability to the
claimant. in the event that the life insurance company fails to make the required annuity payments, the company would be required to make such payments. the following table presents the company's top
five groups by structured settlements at december31, 2008 (in millions). also included is thea.m. best rating of the company's predominant insurer from each insurer group at
february19, 2009:
group
structured settlements
a.m. best rating of group's predominant insurer
old mutual
$
1,075
a
third highest of 16 ratings
metlife
a+
second highest of 16 ratings
genworth
a+
second highest of 16 ratings
symetra
a
third highest of 16 ratings
ing group
a+
second highest of 16 ratings
many
reinsurance companies and life insurance companies have been negatively impacted by deteriorating economic conditions, including unprecedented financial market disruption. a number
of such companies have been subjected to downgrades and/or negative outlook changes by various ratings agencies, including those with which the company conducts business. the company considers these
factors in assessing the adequacy of its allowance for uncollectible amounts.
outlook
the company's objective is to enhance its position as a consistently profitable market leader and a cost-effective provider
of property and casualty insurance in the united states and in selected international markets. a variety of factors continue to affect the property and casualty insurance market and the company's core
business outlook for 2009, including general economic conditions, competitive conditions in the markets served by the company's business segments, loss cost trends, interest rate trends and the
investment environment.
general economic conditions.the united states and other countries around the world have been experiencing deteriorating economic
conditions,
including unprecedented financial market disruption. if this trend in economic conditions continues or deteriorates further in 2009, it could adversely affect the company's results in future periods.
during an economic downturn, demand for the company's products may decrease, and credit risk associated with agents, customers, reinsurers and the company's investment portfolio may be adversely
impacted. in addition, in an inflationary environment, loss costs may increase. such costs may also increase in an economic downturn, due to an increase in fraudulent reporting of claims, reduced
maintenance of insured property or increased frequency of small claims. moreover, although the company does not anticipate needing additional capital in the near term due to the company's strong
current financial position, financial market disruption may make it difficult for the insurance industry generally, and the company in particular, to raise additional capital, when needed, on
acceptable terms or at all. as discussed below, losses on the company's investment portfolio may adversely impact the company's shareholders' equity and statutory surplus. as further discussed below,
the interest rate environment and general economic conditions could further impact the net investment income the company is able to earn on both its fixed maturity investments and other invested
assets.
competition.the company expects property casualty insurance market conditions to continue to be very competitive in 2009, particularly
for new
business. if the current disruption in the insurance marketplace continues into 2009, there may be increased opportunity for new business, but competition for that new business may also be
significant. for example, competitors that are experiencing financial difficulties may offer products at prices and on terms that are not consistent with the company's
table of contents
economic
standards in an effort to maintain their business. the pricing environment for new business generally has less of an impact on underwriting profitability than renewal price changes,
particularly in an environment of high retention rates, which the company has experienced over the past several years. in the business insurance and the financial, professional& international
insurance segments, the company expects renewal price changes in 2009 to be flat with or modestly increase over their 2008 levels. with regard to the components comprising renewal price changes, the
potential slight improvement in rates in 2009 in some product lines is expected to be largely offset by a decline in exposures. in the personal insurance segment in 2009, the company expects that
automobile and homeowners renewal price changes will increase slightly over their 2008 levels. these expectations for the pricing environment, when combined with expected modestly increased loss
costs, will likely result in somewhat reduced underwriting profitability.
loss cost trends.loss cost trends are primarily driven by changes in claim frequency and claim severity. the industry has generally
experienced
unprecedented low levels of non-catastrophe-related claim frequency over the last several years. the company expects this level of claim frequency to continue in 2009 in certain lines of
business, while claim
frequency is expected to increase modestly for other lines of business. the company also expects severity to increase modestly for non-catastrophe-related claims. in the business insurance
and financial, professional& international insurance segments, the company experienced a higher than anticipated level of large, non weather-related losses during 2008. in the personal
insurance segment, the company experienced a higher than anticipated level of non-catastrophe weather related losses during 2008. if these are trends that continue in 2009, they could
result in reduced underwriting profit.
the
overall trend of increased frequency and severity of catastrophic gulf and atlantic coast storms experienced in recent years may continue for the foreseeable future. given the
potential increase in frequency and severity of storms, the company continues to reassess its definition of, and exposure to, coastal risks. these risks are reflected in the pricing and terms and
conditions it will offer in coastal areas. due in part to the increased frequency and severity of the gulf and atlantic coast storms, there has been some disruption in the market for coastal wind
insurance, most significantly in personal lines, as insurers, including the company, have reduced capacity and increased prices. the continued disruption in market conditions, along with the potential
for increased frequency and severity of coastal storms, could result in a decrease in the amount of coastal wind coverage that the company is able or willing to write.
in
recent periods, the company has recorded net favorable prior year reserve development, driven by better than expected loss experience in all of the company's segments for prior loss
years. if better than expected loss experience continues, the company may record additional net favorable prior year reserve development in 2009. in that case, the company may also concurrently revise
favorably its current year loss estimates. however, better than expected loss experience may not continue or may reverse, in which case the company may record no favorable prior year reserve
development or net unfavorable prior year reserve development in future periods. in that case, the company may revise current year loss estimates upward in future periods.
interest rate trends and the investment environment.changes in the general interest rate environment affect the returns available on
new
investments. while a rising interest rate environment enhances the returns available on new fixed maturity investments, thereby favorably impacting net investment income, it reduces the market value
of existing fixed maturity investments, and therefore, shareholders' equity. a decline in interest rates reduces the returns available on new investments, thereby negatively impacting net investment
income, but increases the market value of existing investments and therefore, shareholders' equity. in 2008 and 2007, short-term interest rates declined, reducing the interest income on
the company's short-term investment portfolio. in the second half of 2008, credit spreads on other than short-term investments, which represent the difference between a
risk-free yield (i.e.the yield on u.s. treasury securities) and the actual yield on a fixed-income
table of contents
investment,
increased significantly. this resulted in a decline in the market value of existing other than short-term fixed maturity investments, and therefore, shareholders' equity. the
company
had a net pretax unrealized loss of $294million in its fixed maturities portfolio at december31, 2008, compared with a net pretax unrealized gain of $768million at
december31, 2007.
the
market disruption that occurred in the second half of 2008 resulted in a lack of liquidity in certain sectors of the credit markets and a widening of credit spreads generally. at
december31, 2008, the company had unrealized investment losses of $744million on securities for which fair value was less than 80% of cost of the security. approximately
$592million of the unrealized investment losses had continuously been in an unrealized loss position of greater than 20% of cost for less than three months. if the market disruption continues
and interest rates (inclusive of credit spreads) remain steady or rise, the amount of securities in an unrealized loss of greater than 20% may age and significant additional unrealized investment
losses could occur in the portfolio. these circumstances may result in significant realized losses through sales of securities or other-than-temporary impairment charges in
2009.
at
december31, 2008, approximately 5% of the company's invested assets were comprised of equity securities, private equity limited partnerships, hedge funds, real estate
partnerships, joint ventures, mortgage loans, venture capital investments and trading securities, which are subject to greater volatility than fixed maturity investments. general economic conditions,
stock market conditions and many other factors beyond the company's control may affect the value of these non-fixed maturity investments and the realization of net investment income. for
example, reduced liquidity in the capital markets could adversely impact the company's investment portfolio, particularly investments in private equity limited partnerships, real estate partnerships
and hedge funds, resulting in a decline in transaction volume in these asset classes, and as a result, lower net investment income. for the year ended december31, 2008, these
non-fixed maturity investments collectively produced negative investment income. if the current unfavorable economic environment persists in 2009, the company may continue to experience
negative returns from these investments. the company is not able to predict future market conditions or their impact on net investment income.
net
investment income is an important contributor to the company's results of operations, and the company expects the investment environment to remain challenging in 2009, particularly
with respect to its non-fixed maturity investment portfolio.
for
a discussion of potential risks that could impact the company's financial condition or results of operations, see "item1arisk factors" in this report.
table of contents
liquidity and capital resources
liquidity is a measure of a company's ability to generate sufficient cash flows to meet the short- and long-term cash
requirements of its business operations. the liquidity requirements of the company's business have been met primarily by funds generated from operations, asset maturities and income received on
investments. cash provided from these sources is used primarily for claims and claim adjustment expense payments and operating expenses. the timing and amount of catastrophe claims are inherently
unpredictable. such claims increase liquidity requirements. the timing and amount of reinsurance recoveries may be affected by reinsurer solvency and reinsurance coverage disputes. additionally, the
variability of asbestos-related claim payments, as well as the volatility of potential judgments and settlements arising out of litigation, may also result in increased liquidity requirements. it is
the opinion of the company's management that the company's future liquidity needs will be adequately met from all of the above sources.
at
december31, 2008, total cash, short-term invested assets and other readily marketable securities aggregating $2.15billion were held at the holding company.
the assets held at the holding company, combined with other sources of funds available, primarily additional dividends from operating subsidiaries, are sufficient to meet the holding company's current
liquidity requirements. these liquidity requirements primarily include shareholder dividends and debt service. the company's
insurance subsidiaries are subject to various regulatory restrictions that limit the maximum amount of dividends available to be paid to their parent without prior approval of insurance regulatory
authorities. a maximum of $3.07billion is available in 2009 for such dividends without prior approval of the connecticut insurance department for connecticut-domiciled subsidiaries and the
minnesota department of commerce for minnesota-domiciled subsidiaries. the holding company received $3.70billion of dividends from its domestic insurance subsidiaries in 2008. the company has
a shelf registration with the securities and exchange commission which permits it to issue securities. the company also has a $1.0billion line of credit facility with several major banks that
expires in the second quarter of 2010. in the fourth quarter of 2008, the company replaced lehman brothers bank, fsb's $60million participation in this facility through an assignment to
another financial institution. this line of credit also backs up the company's $800million commercial paper program, of which $100million was outstanding at december31, 2008.
the company is not reliant on its commercial paper program to meet its operating cash flow needs.
the
company currently utilizes letters of credit issued by major banks to support its operations at lloyd's. as a result of movements in foreign currency exchange rates, additional
capital, which the company expects to provide by obtaining additional letters of credit issued by major banks, will be required in the near-term to support the company's operations at
lloyd's. if letters of credit are not available at a reasonable price or at all in the future, the company may have to seek alternative means of supporting its operations at lloyd's, which could
include utilizing holding company funds on hand.
operating activities
net cash flows provided by operating activities totaled $3.14billion, $5.29billion and $4.77billion in 2008,
2007 and 2006, respectively. cash flows in 2008 reflected an increase in claim payments (including the impact of higher catastrophe losses and the $449million asbestos settlement payment
related to acands,inc., which is discussed in more detail in the "asbestos claims and litigation" section herein), and a reduction in reinsurance recoveries compared with 2007. in addition,
the company made a $450million contribution to its pension plan in 2008. no pension plan contribution was made in 2007. cash flows in each of 2007 and 2006, as compared to the preceding year,
reflected higher levels of collected premiums and net investment income, lower claim payments on catastrophe losses, as well as lower runoff claim payments. cash flows from operations in 2007 and 2006
benefited from significant collections on reinsurance recoverables in both years, including those related to 2005 hurricane losses, operations in runoff (primarily gulf) and various commutation
agreements. these
table of contents
factors
were partially offset by an increase in tax payments resulting from higher profitability, expenses related to increased business volume and continued expenditures to support business growth
and product development, and higher interest payments.
investing activities
net cash flows used in investing activities totaled $162million, $2.53billion and $3.06billion in 2008, 2007
and 2006, respectively. fixed maturity securities accounted for the majority of investment purchases in all three years.
the
company's consolidated total investments at december31, 2008 declined $4.08billion from year-end 2007, reflecting the $2.12billion of common share
repurchases made during 2008, a $1.19billion pretax decline in the unrealized appreciation of investments since year-end 2007 (to an unrealized loss position at december31,
2008), the sale of unionamerica and dividends to shareholders, partially offset by investment purchases resulting from strong cash flows from operations. the net unrealized loss position at
december31, 2008 reflected the impact of rising interest rates on longer-dated fixed maturity securities primarily due to the widening of credit spreads generally.
the
company's management of the duration of the fixed maturity investment portfolio generally produces a duration that exceeds the estimated duration of the company's net insurance
liabilities. the average duration of fixed maturities and short-term securities was 4.2 and 4.0 at december31, 2008 and 2007, respectively.
the
primary goals of the company's asset liability management process are to satisfy the insurance liabilities, manage the interest rate risk embedded in those insurance liabilities and
maintain sufficient liquidity to cover fluctuations in projected liability cash flows. generally, the expected principal and interest payments produced by the company's fixed maturity portfolio
adequately fund the estimated runoff of the company's insurance reserves. although this is not an exact cash flow match in each period, the substantial degree by which the market value of the fixed
maturity portfolio exceeds the expected present value of the net insurance liabilities, as well as the positive cash flow from newly sold policies and the large amount of high quality liquid bonds,
provide assurance of the company's ability to fund the payment of claims without having to sell illiquid assets or access credit facilities.
financing activities
net cash flows used in financing activities totaled $2.87billion, $2.95billion and $1.59billion in 2008, 2007
and 2006, respectively. the 2008 total primarily reflected common share repurchases, the repayment of debt and dividends to shareholders, partially offset by the net proceeds from debt issuances and
employee stock option exercises. the 2007 and 2006 totals primarily reflected common share repurchases, the early redemption of debt, the repayment of maturing debt and
dividends to shareholders, partially offset by the issuance of debt and proceeds from employee stock option exercises.
debt transactions.
2008.on march15, 2008, the company's $400million, 3.75% senior notes matured and were fully paid. on may13, 2008, the
company issued $500million aggregate principal amount of 5.80% senior notes that will mature on may15, 2018. the net proceeds of the issuance, after original issuance discount and the
deduction of underwriting expenses and commissions and other expenses, totaled approximately $496million. interest on the senior notes is payable semi-annually on may15 and
november15, commencing november15, 2008. the senior notes are redeemable in whole at any time or in part from time to time, at the company's option, at a redemption price equal to the
greater of (a)100% of the principal amount of senior notes to be redeemed or (b)the sum of the present values of the remaining scheduled payments of principal and interest on the
senior notes to be redeemed
table of contents
(exclusive
of interest accrued to the date of redemption) discounted to the date of redemption on a semi-annual basis (assuming a 360-day year consisting of twelve
30-day months) at the then current treasury rate plus 30 basis points for the senior notes.
on
december15, 2008, two medium-term notes with a cumulative par value of $149million, each bearing an interest rate of 6.38%, matured and were fully paid.
2007.in january 2007, the company redeemed $81million of 8.47% subordinated debentures originally issued in 1997 and due
january10,
2027. the debentures were redeemable by the company on or after january10, 2007. in january 1997, usf&g capitalii, a business trust, issued $100million of capital securities,
the proceeds of which, along with $3million in capital provided by the company, were used to purchase the subordinated debentures issued by usf&g corporation and subsequently assumed by the
company after the merger of the st.paul companiesinc. (spc) and travelers property casualty corp. (tpc). during the period prior to redemption, the company had repurchased and retired
$22million of the debentures in open market transactions. upon the company's redemption of the remaining $81million of subordinated debentures in january 2007, usf&g capitalii
in turn used the proceeds to redeem its remaining capital securities outstanding. usf&g capitalii was then liquidated,
and the company received a $3million distribution of capital. the company recorded a $3million pretax gain on the redemption of the subordinated debentures, due to the remaining
unamortized fair value adjustment recorded at the merger date, less the redemption premium paid.
in
march 2007, the company issued $1billion aggregate principal amount of 6.25% fixed-to-floating rate junior subordinated debentures due march15,
2067 for net proceeds of $986million (after original issue discount and the deduction of underwriting expenses and commissions and other expenses). the debentures were issued at a discount,
resulting in an effective interest rate of 6.447%. the debentures bear interest at an annual rate of 6.25% from the date of issuance to, but excluding, march15, 2017, payable
semi-annually in arrears on march15 and september15. from and including march15, 2017, the debentures will bear interest at an annual rate equal to three-month
libor plus 2.215%, payable quarterly on march15, june15, september15 and december15 of each year. the company has the right, on one or more occasions, to defer the
payment of interest on the debentures. the company will not be required to settle deferred interest until it has deferred interest for five consecutive years or, if earlier, made a payment of current
interest during a deferral period. the company may defer interest for up to ten consecutive years without giving rise to an event of default. deferred interest will accumulate additional interest at
an annual rate equal to the annual interest rate then applicable to the debentures.
the
debentures carry a 60-year final maturity and a scheduled maturity date in year thirty. during the 180-day period ending not more than fifteen and not less
than ten business days prior to the scheduled maturity date, the company is required to use commercially reasonable efforts to sell enough qualifying capital securities, or at its option, common
stock, qualifying warrants, mandatorily convertible preferred stock, debt exchangeable for common equity or debt exchangeable for preferred equity to permit repayment of the debentures at the
scheduled maturity date. if any debentures remain outstanding after the scheduled maturity date, the unpaid amount will remain outstanding until the company has raised sufficient proceeds from the
sale of qualifying capital securities or, at its option, common stock, qualifying warrants, mandatorily convertible preferred stock, debt exchangeable for common equity or debt exchangeable for
preferred equity to permit the repayment in full of the debentures. if there are remaining debentures at the final maturity date, the company is required to redeem the debentures using any source of
funds. qualifying capital securities are securities (other than common stock, qualifying warrants, mandatorily convertible preferred stock, debt exchangeable for common equity, and debt exchangeable
for preferred equity) which generally are treated by the ratings agencies as having similar equity content to the debentures.
table of contents
the
company can redeem the debentures at its option, in whole or in part, at any time on or after march15, 2017 at a redemption price of 100% of the principal amount being
redeemed plus accrued but unpaid interest. the company can redeem the debentures at its option prior to march15, 2017 (a)in whole at any time or in part from time to time or
(b)in whole, but not in part, in the event of certain tax or rating agency events relating to the debentures, at a redemption price equal to the
greater of 100% of the principal amount being redeemed and the applicable make-whole amount, in each case plus any accrued and unpaid interest.
in
connection with the offering of the debentures, the company entered into a "replacement capital covenant" for the benefit of holders of one or more designated series of the company's
indebtedness (which will initially be the 6.750% senior notes due 2036). under the terms of the replacement capital covenant, if the company redeems the debentures at any time prior to
march15, 2047 it can only do so with the proceeds of securities that are treated by the rating agencies as having similar equity content to the debentures.
in
march 2007, the company's $500million, 5.75% senior notes matured and were fully paid.
in
april 2007, the company completed the redemption of its outstanding $893million, 4.50% convertible junior subordinated notes due in 2032 (the notes). the notes were originally
issued by travelers property casualty corp., and the company assumed certain obligations relating to the notes pursuant to a second supplemental indenture dated april1, 2004. each note had a
principal amount of $25.00. the redemption price for each note was $25.5625 plus $0.009375 of accrued and unpaid interest. any note called for redemption could be surrendered for conversion into
common stock before the close of business on april17, 2007. each note was convertible into 0.4684 shares of common stock of the travelers companies,inc. holders of $36million
of the notes tendered their certificates in exchange for the issuance of 670,910 of the company's common shares. the remaining $857million of notes were redeemed for cash, along with accrued
interest to the date of redemption. the company recorded a $39million pretax loss ($25million after-tax) in other revenues in the second quarter of 2007 related to the
redemption, consisting of the redemption premium paid and the write-off of remaining unamortized issuance costs.
in
may 2007, the company issued $250million aggregate principal amount of 5.375% senior notes due june15, 2012 (the 2012 senior notes), $450million aggregate
principal amount of 5.750% senior notes due december15, 2017 (the 2017 senior notes), and $800million aggregate principal amount of 6.250% senior notes due june15, 2037 (the
2037 senior notes). the total net proceeds of these three senior note issuances, after original issuance discounts and the deduction of underwriting expenses and commissions and other expenses, were
approximately $1.47billion. interest on each of the senior note issuances is payable semi-annually on june15 and december15, commencing december15, 2007.
each series of senior notes is redeemable in whole at any time or in part from time to time, at the company's option, at a redemption price equal to the greater of (a)100% of the principal
amount of senior notes to be redeemed, or (b)the sum of the present values of the remaining scheduled payments of principal and interest on the senior notes to be redeemed (exclusive of
interest accrued to the date of redemption) discounted to the date of redemption on a semi-annual basis (assuming a 360-day year consisting of twelve 30-day months)
at the then current treasury rate plus 12.5 basis points for the 2012 senior notes, 15 basis points for the 2017 senior notes and 20 basis points for the 2037 senior notes. the company applied a
portion of the net proceeds of this offering to repay approximately $442million of senior notes maturing on august16, 2007 and to repay approximately $42million of
medium-term notes maturing in the third quarter of 2007. the remaining proceeds were used for general corporate purposes. prior to applying these proceeds, the company invested them in
investment grade, marketable securities.
in
august 2007, the company's $442million, 5.01% senior notes matured and were fully paid.
table of contents
in
2007, medium-term notes with a cumulative par value of $72million and interest rates ranging from 6.85% to 7.37% matured and were fully paid.
2006.in june 2006, the company issued $400million aggregate principal amount of 6.25% senior unsecured notes due june20,
2016 and
$400million aggregate principal amount of 6.75% senior unsecured notes due june20, 2036. the notes were issued at a discount, resulting in effective interest rates of 6.30% and 6.86%,
respectively. net proceeds from the issuances (after original issue discount and expenses) totaled approximately $786million, which the company applied to the redemption of approximately
$593million of 7.60% subordinated debentures (described in more detail below), $150million of 6.75% senior notes that matured on november15, 2006 and $56million of
medium-term notes that matured in the second half of the year.
in
november 2006, the company redeemed $593million of 7.60% subordinated debentures originally issued in 2001 and due october15, 2050. the debentures were redeemable by
the company on or after november13, 2006. in november 2001, st.paul capital trust i, a business trust, issued $575million of preferred securities, the proceeds of which, along
with $18million in capital provided by the company, were used to purchase the subordinated debentures issued by the company. upon the company's redemption of its subordinated debentures in
november 2006, st.paul capital trust i in turn used the proceeds to redeem its preferred securities. st.paul capital trust i was then liquidated, and the company received an
$18million distribution of capital. the company recorded a $42million pretax gain on the redemption of the subordinated debentures, representing the remaining unamortized fair value
adjustment recorded at the merger date. a portion of the proceeds from the june 2006 debt issuances described above was used to fund this redemption.
the
company's debt-to-capital ratio of 19.5% at december31, 2008 was slightly below its 20% targeted level.
the
amounts of debt obligations, other than commercial paper, that becomes due in 2009, 2010 and 2011, are $143million, $273million and $11million, respectively.
dividends.dividends paid to shareholders totaled $715million, $742million and $702million in 2008, 2007 and 2006,
respectively. on february4, 2009, the company's board of directors declared a quarterly dividend of $0.30 per share, payable march31, 2009 to shareholders of record on march10,
2009. the declaration and payment of future dividends to holders of the company's common stock will be at the discretion of the company's board of directors and will depend upon many factors,
including the company's financial position, earnings, capital requirements of the company's operating subsidiaries, legal requirements, regulatory constraints and other factors as the board of
directors deems relevant. dividends would be paid by the company only if declared by its board of directors out of funds legally available, subject to any other restrictions that may be applicable to
the company.
share repurchases.in january 2008, the board of directors authorized an additional $5billion for the repurchase of the company's
common
shares. under the authorization, repurchases may be made from time to time in the open market, pursuant to preset trading plans meeting the requirements of rule10b5-1 under the
securities exchange act of 1934, in private transactions or otherwise. the authorization does not have a stated expiration date. the timing and actual number of shares to be repurchased in the future
will depend on a variety of factors, including corporate and regulatory requirements, price, catastrophe losses and other market conditions. share repurchase levels in prior periods may not be
indicative of future repurchase activity. notwithstanding the company's financial strength and liquidity, in light of the recent disruption in the financial markets, the company reduced its level of
share repurchases in the fourth quarter of 2008 compared to prior quarters and will likely reduce its share repurchases in 2009 as compared to the level of repurchases in preceding years, although the
company's plans may change depending on market conditions, potential investment opportunities, the company's share price performance or other factors. this potential reduction in
table of contents
share
repurchases in 2009 reflects uncertainty with regard to current economic conditions and not a fundamental change in the company's capital management strategy. the following table summarizes
repurchase activity in 2008 and remaining repurchase capacity at december31, 2008.
quarterly period ending
number of
shares
purchased
cost of shares
repurchased
average price paid
per share
remaining capacity
under share repurchase
program
march31, 2008
20,831,251
$
1,000,332,704
$
48.02
$
4,931,853,967
june30, 2008
15,287,182
750,014,344
49.06
4,181,839,623
september30, 2008
6,197,529
271,984,984
43.89
3,909,854,639
december31, 2008
2,712,550
99,997,100
36.86
3,809,857,539
total
45,028,512
$
2,122,329,132
$
47.13
$
3,809,857,539
since
the inception of the repurchase authorizations in may 2006, the company has repurchased a cumulative total of 123.9million shares for a total cost of $6.19billion,
or $49.98 per share, through december31, 2008.
in
2008, 2007 and 2006, the company acquired 0.8million, 1.7million and 1.2million shares, respectively, of common stock from employees as treasury stock
primarily to cover payroll withholding taxes related to the vesting of restricted stock awards and exercises of stock options.
capital resources
capital resources reflect the overall financial strength of the company and its ability to borrow funds at competitive rates and raise
new capital to meet its needs. the following table summarizes the components of the company's capital structure at december31, 2008 and 2007.
(at december31, in millions)
debt:
short-term
$
$
long-term
5,938
5,577
net unamortized fair value adjustments and debt issuance costs
total debt
6,181
6,242
preferred shareholders' equity
common shareholders' equity:
common stock and retained earnings, less treasury stock
26,130
25,834
accumulated other changes in equity from nonowner sources
(900
)
total shareholders' equity
25,319
26,616
total capitalization
$
31,500
$
32,858
the
$1.36billion decrease in total capitalization from year-end 2007 reflected the impact of $2.12billion of common share repurchases, a net
after-tax $764million decline in net unrealized appreciation on investments (to a net unrealized loss position at december31, 2008), $715million of dividends to
shareholders, a $405million decline primarily due to a reduction in the fair value of pension plan assets, and, to a lesser degree, the impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates.
these factors were partially offset by net income in 2008. the net unrealized loss position at december31, 2008 reflected the impact of rising interest rates on longer-dated fixed maturity
securities primarily due to the widening of credit spreads generally.
line of credit agreement.the company maintains an $800million commercial paper program, of which $100million was
outstanding at
december31, 2008, with back-up liquidity consisting of a bank
table of contents
credit
agreement. on june10, 2005, the company entered into a $1.0billion, five-year revolving credit agreement with a syndicate of financial institutions. pursuant to
covenants in the credit agreement, the company must maintain an excess of consolidated net worth over goodwill and other intangible assets of not less than $10billion at all times. the company
must also maintain a ratio of total consolidated debt to the sum of total consolidated debt plus consolidated net worth of not greater
than 0.40 to 1.00. in addition, the credit agreement contains other customary restrictive covenants as well as certain customary events of default, including with respect to a change in control. at
december31, 2008, the company was in compliance with these covenants and all other covenants related to its outstanding debt instruments. there was no amount outstanding under the credit
agreement as of december31, 2008.
shelf registration.in december 2008, the company filed with the securities and exchange commission a universal shelf registration
statement for the
potential offering and sale of securities to replace its expiring universal shelf registration statement. the company may offer these securities from time to time at prices and on other terms to be
determined at the time of offering. during 2008 and 2007, the company issued $500million and $2.50billion, respectively, of debt (as described above) under the prior shelf registration
statement.
share repurchase authorization.at december31, 2008, the company had $3.81billion of capacity remaining under its share
repurchase
authorization approved by the board of directors.
contractual obligations
the following table summarizes, as of december31, 2008, the company's future payments under contractual obligations and
estimated claims and claims related payments. the table excludes short-term obligations and includes only liabilities at december31, 2008 that are expected to be settled in cash.
the
table below includes the amount and estimated future timing of claims and claim related payments. the amounts do not represent the exact liability, but instead represent estimates,
generally utilizing actuarial projections techniques, at a given accounting date. these estimates include expectations of what the ultimate settlement and administration of claims will cost based on
the company's assessment of facts and circumstances then known, review of historical settlement patterns, estimates of trends in claims severity, frequency, legal theories of liability and other
factors. variables in the reserve estimation process can be affected by both internal and external events, such as changes in claims handling procedures, economic inflation, legal trends and
legislative changes. many of these items are not directly quantifiable, particularly on a prospective basis. additionally, there may be significant reporting lags between the occurrence of the
policyholder event and the time it is actually reported to the insurer. the future cash flows related to the items contained in the table below required estimation of both amount (including severity
considerations) and timing. amount and timing are frequently estimated separately. an estimation of both amount and timing of future cash flows related to claims and claim related payments is
generally reliable only in the aggregate with some unavoidable estimation uncertainty.
table of contents
the contractual obligations related to debt, operating leases, purchase obligations, long-term unfunded investment commitments, estimated claims and
claims related payments (gross of the estimated reinsurance recoveries) and liabilities related to unrecognized tax benefits, at december31, 2008 were as follows:
payments due by period
(in millions)
total
less than
1 year
1-3 years
3-5 years
after
5 years
debt(1)
medium-term notes
$
$
$
$
$
senior notes
4,650
3,650
junior subordinated debentures
1,254
1,254
zero coupon convertible notes
private placement notes
total debt principal
6,081
4,904
interest
5,384
3,643
total long-term debt obligations
11,465
1,412
8,547
operating leases(2)
purchase obligations
information systems administration and maintenance commitments(3)
reinsurance brokerage commitment(4)
other purchase commitments(5)
total purchase obligations
long-term unfunded investment commitments (6)
1,562
estimated claims and claims related payments
claims and claim adjustment expenses(7)
55,735
11,862
15,015
9,103
19,755
claims from large deductible policies(8)
loss-based assessments(9)
reinsurance contracts accounted for as deposits(10)
payout from ceded funds withheld(11)
total estimated claims and claims related payments
56,298
11,996
15,206
9,137
19,959
liabilities related to unrecognized tax benefits(12)
1,280
total
$
71,834
$
13,974
$
17,663
$
11,267
$
28,930
(1)see
note8 of notes to the company's consolidated financial statements for a further discussion of outstanding indebtedness. because the amounts
reported in the foregoing table include principal and interest, the total long-term debt obligations will not agree with the amounts reported in note8.
(2)represents
agreements entered into in the ordinary course of business to lease office space, equipment and furniture.
(3)includes
agreements with vendors to purchase system software administration and maintenance services.
table of contents
(4)in
connection with the sale of its insurance brokerage operations, the company committed to acquire brokerage services from the buyer through 2012. see
note15 of notes to the company's consolidated financial statements.
(5)includes
commitments to vendors entered into in the ordinary course of business for goods and services including office supplies, archival services, etc.
(6)represents
estimated timing for fulfilling unfunded commitments for private equity limited partnerships, hedge funds, real estate partnerships, joint
ventures and certain private equity investments.
(7)the
amounts in "claims and claim adjustment expenses" in the table above represent the estimated timing of future payments for both reported and unreported
claims incurred and related claim adjustment expenses, gross of reinsurance recoverables.
the
company has entered into reinsurance agreements to protect itself from potential losses in excess of the amount it is prepared to accept as described in note5 of notes to the company's
consolidated financial statements.
in
order to qualify for reinsurance accounting, a reinsurance agreement must indemnify the insurer from insurance risk, i.e.,the agreement must transfer amount and timing risk. since the
timing and amount of cash inflows from such reinsurance agreements are directly related to the underlying payment of claims and claim adjustment expenses by the insurer, reinsurance receivables are
recognized in a manner consistent with the liabilities (the estimated liability for claims and claim adjustment expenses) relating to the underlying reinsured contracts. the presence of any feature
that can delay timely reimbursement of claims by a reinsurer results in the reinsurance contract being accounted for as a deposit rather than reinsurance. (see below.) the assumptions used in
estimating the amount and timing of the reinsurance receivables are consistent with those used in estimating the amount and timing of the related liabilities.
reinsurance
agreements that do not transfer both amount and timing risk are accounted for as deposits and included in "reinsurance contracts accounted for as deposits" in the table above.
the
estimated future cash inflows from the company's reinsurance contracts that qualify for reinsurance accounting are as follows:
(in millions)
total
less than
1 year
1-3
years
3-5
years
after
5 years
reinsurance receivables
$
13,553
$
2,705
$
3,448
$
2,221
$
5,179
the
company manages its business and evaluates its liabilities for claims and claim adjustment expense on a net of reinsurance basis. the estimated cash flows on a net of reinsurance basis are as
follows:
(in millions)
total
less than
1 year
1-3
years
3-5
years
after
5 years
claims and claim adjustment expenses, net
$
42,182
$
9,157
$
11,567
$
6,882
$
14,576
for
business underwritten by non-u.s. operations, future cash flows related to reported and unreported claims incurred and related claim adjustment expenses were translated at the spot
rate on december31, 2008.
the
amounts reported in the table above and in the table of reinsurance receivables above are presented on a nominal basis and have not been adjusted to reflect the time value of money. accordingly,
the amounts above will differ from the company's balance sheet to the extent that the liability for claims and claim adjustment expenses and the related reinsurance receivables have
table of contents
been
discounted in the balance sheet. (see note1 of notes to the company's consolidated financial statements.)
(8)workers'
compensation large deductible policies provide third party coverage in which the company typically is responsible for paying the entire loss under
such policies and then seeks reimbursement from the insured for the deductible amount. "claims from large deductible policies" represent the estimated future payment for claims and claim related
expenses below the deductible amount, net of the estimated recovery of the deductible. the liability and the related deductible receivable for unpaid claims are presented in the consolidated balance
sheet as "contractholder payables" and "contractholder receivables," respectively. most deductibles for such policies are paid directly from the policyholder's escrow which is periodically replenished
by the policyholder. the payment of the loss amounts above the deductible are reported within "claims and claim adjustment expenses" in the above table. because the timing of the collection of the
deductible (contractholder receivables) occurs shortly after the payment of the deductible to a claimant (contractholder payables), these cash flows offset each other in the table.
the
estimated timing of the payment of the contractholder payables and the collection of contractholder receivables for workers' compensation policies is presented below:
(in millions)
total
less than
1 year
1-3
years
3-5
years
after
5 years
contractholder payables/receivables
$
6,350
$
1,619
$
1,811
$
$
1,983
(9)the
amounts in "loss-based assessments" relate to estimated future payments of second-injury fund assessments which would result from payment of
current claim liabilities. second injury funds cover the cost of any additional benefits for aggravation of a pre-existing condition. for loss-based assessments, the cost is
shared by the insurance industry and self-insureds, funded through assessments to insurance companies and self-insureds based on losses. amounts relating to second-injury fund
assessments are included in "other liabilities" in the consolidated balance sheet.
(10)the
amounts in "reinsurance contracts accounted for as deposits" represent estimated future nominal payments for reinsurance agreements that are accounted
for as deposits. amounts payable under deposit agreements are included in "other liabilities" in the consolidated balance sheet. the amounts reported in the table are presented on a nominal basis and
have not been adjusted to reflect the time value of money. accordingly, the amounts above will differ from the company's balance sheet to the extent that deposit values in the balance sheet have been
discounted using deposit accounting.
(11)the
amounts in "payout from ceded funds withheld" represent estimated payments for losses and return of funds held related to certain reinsurance
arrangements whereby the company holds a portion of the premium due to the reinsurer and is allowed to pay claims from the amounts held.
(12)amounts
are included in the consolidated balance sheet as "other liabilities" and "deferred tax asset."
some
of the company's liabilities related to unrecognized tax benefits have associated temporary differences for which offsetting current or deferred tax assets exist and are as follows:
(in millions)
total
less than
1 year
1-3
years
3-5
years
after
5 years
receivables related to unrecognized tax benefits
$
1,186
$
$
$
$
the
above table does not include an analysis of liabilities reported for structured settlements for which the company has purchased annuities and remains contingently liable in the event
of default by the company issuing the annuity. the company is not reasonably likely to incur material future
table of contents
payment
obligations under such agreements. in addition, the company does not have a best estimate of contributions expected to be paid to its qualified pension plan. accordingly, any future
contributions are not included in the foregoing table.
dividend availability
the company's principal insurance subsidiaries are domiciled in the states of connecticut and minnesota. the insurance holding company
laws of both states applicable to the company's subsidiaries requires notice to, and approval by, the state insurance commissioner for the declaration or payment of any dividend that, together with
other distributions made within the preceding twelve months, exceeds the greater of 10% of the insurer's capital and surplus as of the preceding december31, or the insurer's net income for the
twelve-month period ending the preceding december31, in each case determined in accordance with statutory accounting practices and by state regulation. this declaration or payment is further
limited by adjusted unassigned surplus, as determined in accordance with statutory accounting practices.
the
insurance holding company laws of other states in which the company's subsidiaries are domiciled generally contain similar, although in some instances somewhat more restrictive,
limitations on the payment of dividends. a maximum of $3.07billion is available by the end of 2009 for such dividends without prior approval of the connecticut insurance department for
connecticut-domiciled subsidiaries and the minnesota department of commerce for minnesota-domiciled subsidiaries. the holding company received $3.70billion of dividends from its domestic
insurance subsidiaries in 2008.
risk-based capital
the naic adopted rbc requirements for property casualty companies to be used as minimum capital requirements by the naic and states to
identify companies that merit further regulatory action. the formulas have not been designed to differentiate among adequately capitalized companies that operate with levels of capital higher than rbc
requirements. therefore, it is inappropriate and ineffective to use the formulas to rate or to rank these companies. at december31, 2008, all of the company's insurance subsidiaries had
adjusted capital in excess of amounts requiring any company or regulatory action.
off-balance sheet arrangements
the company has entered into certain contingent obligations for guarantees related to letters of credit, issuance of debt securities,
certain investments and various indemnifications, including those related to the sale of business entities. see note15 of notes to the company's consolidated financial statements. the company
does not expect these arrangements to have a material effect on the company's financial position, changes in financial position, revenues and expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital
expenditures or capital resources.
critical accounting estimates
the company considers its most significant accounting estimates to be those applied to claims and claim adjustment expense reserves and
related reinsurance recoverables, investment valuation and impairments, and goodwill impairments.
claims and claim adjustment expense reserves
claims and claim adjustment expense reserves (loss reserves) represent management's estimate of ultimate unpaid costs of losses and
loss adjustment expenses for claims that have been reported and claims that have been incurred but not yet reported. loss reserves do not represent an exact calculation of liability, but instead
represent management estimates, generally utilizing actuarial expertise and
table of contents
projection
techniques, at a given accounting date. these loss reserve estimates are expectations of what the ultimate settlement and administration of claims will cost upon final resolution in the
future, based on the company's assessment of facts and circumstances then known, review of historical settlement patterns, estimates of trends in claims severity and frequency, expected
interpretations of legal theories of liability and other factors. in establishing loss reserves, the company also takes into account estimated recoveries, reinsurance, salvage and subrogation. the
loss reserves are reviewed regularly by qualified actuaries employed by the company.
the
process of estimating loss reserves involves a high degree of judgment and is subject to a number of variables. these variables can be affected by both internal and external events,
such as changes in claims handling procedures, changes in individuals involved in the reserve estimation process, economic inflation, legal trends and legislative changes, among others. the impact of
many of these items on ultimate costs for claims and claim adjustment expenses is difficult to estimate. loss reserve estimation difficulties also differ significantly by product line due to
differences in claim complexity, the volume of claims, the potential severity of individual claims, the determination of occurrence date for a claim and reporting lags (the time between the occurrence
of the policyholder event and when it is actually reported to the insurer). informed judgment is applied throughout the process, including the application of various individual experiences and
expertise to multiple sets of data and analyses. the company continually refines its loss reserve estimates in a regular ongoing process as historical loss experience develops and additional claims
are reported and settled. the company rigorously attempts to consider all significant facts and circumstances known at the time loss reserves are established. due to the inherent uncertainty
underlying loss reserve estimates including, but not limited to, the future settlement environment, final resolution of the estimated liability for claims and claim adjustment expenses may be higher
or lower than the related loss reserves at the reporting date. therefore, actual paid losses, as claims are settled in the future, may be materially different in amount than current loss
reservesfavorable or unfavorable.
because
establishment of loss reserves is an inherently uncertain process involving estimates, currently established loss reserves may change. the company reflects adjustments to loss
reserves in the results of operations in the period the estimates are changed.
there
are also additional risks which impact the estimation of ultimate costs for catastrophes. for example, the estimation of reserves related to hurricanes can be affected by the
inability of the company and its insureds to access portions of the impacted areas, the complexity of factors contributing to the losses, the legal and regulatory uncertainties and the nature of the
information available to establish the reserves. complex factors include, but are not limited to: determining whether damage was caused by flooding versus wind; evaluating general liability and
pollution exposures; estimating additional living expenses; estimating the impact of demand surge, infrastructure disruption, fraud, the effect of mold damage and business interruption costs; and
reinsurance collectibility. the timing of a catastrophe, such as at or near the end of a reporting period, can also affect the information available to us in estimating reserves for that reporting
period. the estimates related to catastrophes are adjusted as actual claims emerge.
a
portion of the company's gross claims and claim adjustment expense reserves are for asbestos and environmental claims and related litigation, which totaled $3.70billion at
december31, 2008. while the ongoing review of asbestos and environmental claims and associated liabilities considers the inconsistencies of court decisions as to coverage, plaintiffs' expanded
theories of liability and the risks inherent in complex litigation and other uncertainties, in the opinion of the company's management, it is possible that the outcome of the continued uncertainties
regarding these claims could result in liability in future periods that differs from current reserves by an amount that could be material to the company's future operating results. see the preceding
discussion of "asbestos claims and litigation" and "environmental claims and litigation."
table of contents
gross
claims and claim adjustment expense reserves by product line were as follows:
(at december31, in millions)
case
ibnr
total
case
ibnr
total
general liability
$
6,529
$
11,809
$
18,338
$
7,180
$
12,388
$
19,568
property
1,414
2,272
1,069
2,032
commercial multi-peril
1,816
2,140
3,956
1,860
2,499
4,359
commercial automobile
2,413
1,511
3,924
2,450
1,640
4,090
workers' compensation
9,419
6,872
16,291
9,373
6,474
15,847
fidelity and surety
1,168
1,865
1,026
1,904
personal automobile
1,448
1,043
2,491
1,466
2,464
homeowners and personalother
1,433
1,284
international and other
2,120
1,956
4,076
3,054
3,017
6,071
property-casualty
26,489
28,157
54,646
27,875
29,744
57,619
accident and health
claims and claim adjustment expense reserves
$
26,557
$
28,166
$
54,723
$
27,946
$
29,754
$
57,700
the
$2.98billion decline in gross claims and claim adjustment expense reserves since december31, 2007 primarily reflected favorable prior year reserve development during
2008, payments related to operations in runoff (including asbestos and environmental payments) and the sale of unionamerica, partially offset by catastrophe losses incurred. during the third quarter
of 2008, the company made a $449million settlement payment related to acands,inc., formerly a national distributor and installer of products containing asbestos, that reduced claim and
claim adjustment expense reserves. (also, see "partiitem3, legal proceedings").
asbestos
and environmental reserves are included in the general liability, commercial multi-peril and international and other lines in the summary table. asbestos and environmental
reserves are discussed separately; see "asbestos claims and litigation", "environmental claims and litigation" and "uncertainty regarding adequacy of asbestos and environmental reserves."
general discussion
the process for estimating the liabilities for claims and claim expenses begins with the collection and analysis of claim data. data on
individual reported claims, both current and historical, including paid amounts and individual claim adjuster estimates, are grouped by common characteristics (components) and evaluated by actuaries
in their analyses of ultimate claim liabilities by product line. such data is occasionally supplemented with external data as available and when appropriate. the process of analyzing reserves for a
component is undertaken on a regular basis, generally quarterly, in light of continually updated information.
multiple
estimation methods are available for the analysis of ultimate claim liabilities. each estimation method has its own set of assumption variables and its own advantages and
disadvantages, with no single estimation method being better than the others in all situations and no one set of assumption variables being meaningful for all product line components. the relative
strengths and weaknesses of the particular estimation methods when applied to a particular group of claims can also change over
time. therefore, the actual choice of estimation method(s) can change with each evaluation. the estimation method(s) chosen are those that are believed to produce the most reliable indication at that
particular evaluation date for the claim liabilities being evaluated.
in
most cases, multiple estimation methods will be valid for the particular facts and circumstances of the claim liabilities being evaluated. this will result in a range of reasonable
estimates for any
table of contents
particular
claim liability. the company uses such range analyses to back test whether previously established estimates for reserves at the reporting segments are reasonable, given subsequent
information. reported values found to be closer to the endpoints of a range of reasonable estimates are subject to further detailed reviews. these reviews may substantiate the validity of management's
recorded estimate or lead to a change in the reported estimate.
the
exact boundary points of these ranges are more qualitative than quantitative in nature, as no clear line of demarcation exists to determine when the set of underlying assumptions for
an estimation method switches from being reasonable to unreasonable. as a result, the company does not believe that the endpoints of these ranges are or would be comparable across companies. in
addition, potential interactions among the different estimation assumptions for different product lines make the aggregation of individual ranges a highly judgmental and inexact process.
property
casualty insurance policies are either written on a claims-made or on an occurrence basis. claims-made policies generally cover, subject to requirements in
individual policies, claims reported during the policy period. policies that are written on an occurrence basis require that the insured demonstrate that a loss occurred in the policy period, even if
the insured reports the loss many years later.
most
general liability policies are written on an occurrence basis. these policies are subject to substantial loss development over time as facts and circumstances change in the years
following the policy issuance. the occurrence form, which accounts for much of the reserve development in asbestos and environmental exposures, is also used to provide coverage for construction
general liability, including construction defect. occurrence-based forms of insurance for general liability exposures require substantial projection of various trends, including future inflation and
judicial interpretations and societal litigation dynamics, among others.
a
basic premise in most actuarial analyses is that past patterns demonstrated in the data will repeat themselves in the future, absent a material change in the associated risk factors
discussed below. to the extent a material change affecting the ultimate claim liability is known, such change is quantified to the extent possible through an analysis of internal company data and, if
available and when appropriate, external data. such a measurement is specific to the facts and circumstances of the particular claim
portfolio and the known change being evaluated. significant structural changes to the available data, product mix or organization can materially impact the reserve estimation process.
informed
judgment is applied throughout the reserving process. this includes the application of various individual experiences and expertise to multiple sets of data and analyses. in
addition to actuaries, experts involved with the reserving process also include underwriting and claims personnel and lawyers, as well as other company management. therefore, management may have to
consider varying individual viewpoints as part of its estimation of loss reserves. it is also likely that during periods of significant change, such as a merger, consistent application of informed
judgment becomes even more complicated and difficult.
the
variables discussed above in this general discussion have different impacts on reserve estimation uncertainty for a given product line, depending on the length of the claim tail, the
reporting lag, the impact of individual claims and the complexity of the claim process for a given product line.
product
lines are generally classifiable as either long tail or short tail, based on the average length of time between the event triggering claims under a policy and the final
resolution of those claims. short tail claims are reported and settled quickly, resulting in less estimation variability. the longer the time before final claim resolution, the greater the exposure to
estimation risks and hence the greater the estimation uncertainty.
a
major component of the claim tail is the reporting lag. the reporting lag, which is the time between the event triggering a claim and the reporting of the claim to the insurer, makes
estimating
table of contents
ibnr
inherently more uncertain. in addition, the greater the reporting lag, the greater the proportion of ibnr to the total claim liability for the product line. writing new products with material
reporting lags can result in adding several years worth of ibnr claim exposure before the reporting lag exposure becomes clearly observable, thereby increasing the risk associated with pricing and
reserving such products. the most extreme example of claim liabilities with long reporting lags are asbestos claims.
for
some lines, the impact of large individual claims can be material to the analysis. these lines are generally referred to as being "low frequency/high severity," while lines without
this "large claim" sensitivity are referred to as "high frequency/low severity." estimates of claim liabilities for low frequency/high severity lines can be sensitive to the impact of a small number
of potentially large claims. as a result, the role of judgment is much greater for these reserve estimates. in contrast, for high frequency/low severity lines the impact of individual claims is
relatively minor and the range of reasonable reserve estimates is narrower and more stable.
claim
complexity can also greatly affect the estimation process by impacting the number of assumptions needed to produce the estimate, the potential stability of the underlying data and
claim process, and the ability to gain an understanding of the data. product lines with greater claim complexity, such as for certain surety and construction exposures, have inherently greater
estimation uncertainty.
actuaries
have to exercise a considerable degree of judgment in the evaluation of all these factors in their analysis of reserves. the human element in the application of actuarial
judgment is unavoidable when faced with material uncertainty. different actuaries may choose different assumptions when faced with such uncertainty, based on their individual backgrounds, professional
experiences and areas of focus. hence, the estimates selected by the various actuaries may differ materially from each other.
lastly,
significant structural changes to the available data, product mix or organization can also materially impact the reserve estimation process. events such as mergers increase the
inherent uncertainty of reserve estimates for a period of time, until stable trends reestablish themselves within the new organization.
risk factors
the major causes of material uncertainty ("risk factors") generally will vary for each product line, as well as for each separately
analyzed component of the product line. in a few cases, such risk factors are explicit assumptions of the estimation method, but in most cases, they are implicit. for example, a method may explicitly
assume that a certain percentage of claims will close each year, but will implicitly assume that the legal interpretation of existing contract language will remain unchanged. actual results will
likely vary from expectations for each of these assumptions, causing actual paid losses, as claims are settled in the future, to be different in amount than the reserves being estimated currently.
some
risk factors will affect more than one product line. examples include changes in claim department practices, changes in settlement patterns, regulatory and legislative actions,
court actions, timeliness of claim reporting, state mix of claimants and degree of claimant fraud. the extent of the impact of a risk factor will also vary by components within a product line.
individual risk factors are also subject to interactions with other risk factors within product line components.
the
effect of a particular risk factor on estimates of claim liabilities cannot be isolated in most cases. for example, estimates of potential claim settlements may be impacted by the
risk associated with potential court rulings, but the final settlement agreement typically does not delineate how much of the settled amount is due to this and other factors.
the
evaluation of data is also subject to distortion from extreme events or structural shifts, sometimes in unanticipated ways. for example, the timing of claims payments in one
geographic region will be impacted if claim adjusters are temporarily reassigned from that region to help settle catastrophe claims in another region.
table of contents
while some changes in the claim environment are sudden in nature (such as a new court ruling affecting the interpretation of all contracts in that jurisdiction),
others are more evolutionary. evolutionary changes can occur when multiple factors affect final claim values, with the uncertainty surrounding each factor being resolved separately, in stepwise
fashion. the final impact is not known until all steps have occurred.
sudden
changes generally cause a one-time shift in claim liability estimates, although there may be some lag in reliable quantification of their impact. evolutionary changes
generally cause a series of shifts in claim liability estimates, as each component of the evolutionary change becomes evident and estimable.
actuarial methods for analyzing and estimating claims and claim adjustment expense reserves
the principal estimation and analysis methods utilized by the company's actuaries are the paid development method, the case incurred
development method, the bornhuetter-ferguson (bf) method, and average value analysis combined with the reported claim development
method. the bf method is usually utilized for more recent accident periods, with a transition to other methods as the underlying claim data becomes more voluminous and therefore more credible. these
are typically referred to as traditional actuarial methods. (see glossary for an explanation of these methods.)
while
these are the principal methods utilized throughout the company, actuaries evaluating a particular component for a product line have available to them the full range of methods
developed within the casualty actuarial profession. the company's actuaries are also continually monitoring developments within the profession for advances in existing techniques or the creation of
new techniques that might improve current and future estimates.
some
components of product line reserves are susceptible to relatively infrequent large claims that can materially impact the total estimate for that component. in such cases, the
company's actuarial analysis generally isolates and analyzes separately such large claims. the reserves excluding such large claims are generally analyzed using the traditional methods described
above. the reserves associated with large claims are then analyzed utilizing various methods, such as:
estimating the number of large claims and their average values based on historical trends from prior accident periods,
adjusted for the current environment and supplemented with actual data for the accident year analyzed to the extent available.
utilizing individual claim adjuster estimates of the large claims, combined with continual monitoring of the aggregate
accuracy of such claim adjuster estimates. (this monitoring may lead to supplemental adjustments to the aggregate of such claim estimates.)
utilizing historic longer-term average ratios of large claims to small claims, and applying such ratios to the
estimated ultimate small claims from traditional analysis.
ground-up analysis of the underlying exposure (typically used for asbestos and environmental).
the
results of such methodologies are subjected to various reasonability and diagnostic tests, including paid-to-incurred loss ratios, implied
incurred-loss-to-earned-premium ratios and non-zero claim severity trends. an actual versus expected analysis is also performed comparing actual loss
development to expected development based on the prior review. additional analyses may be performed based on the results of these diagnostics, including the investigation of other actuarial methods.
the
methods described above are generally utilized to evaluate management's existing estimate for prior accident periods. for the initial estimate of the current accident year, the
available claim data is typically insufficient to produce a reliable indication. hence, the initial estimate for an accident year is generally based on a loss ratio projection method, which uses the
earned premium for the current year
table of contents
multiplied
by a projected loss ratio. the projected loss ratio is determined through an analysis of prior periods' experience, using loss trend, rate level differences, mix of business changes and
other known or observed factors influencing the current accident year relative to prior accident years. the exact number of prior accident years utilized varies by product line component, based on the
volume of business for that component and the reliability of an individual accident year estimate.
management's estimates
at least once per quarter, certain company management meets with its actuaries to review the latest claims and claim adjustment expense
reserve analyses. based on these analyses, management determines whether its ultimate claim liability estimates should be changed. in doing so, it must evaluate whether the new data provided
represents credible actionable information or an anomaly that will have no effect on estimated ultimate claim liability. for example, as described above, payments may have decreased in one geographic
region due to fewer claim adjusters being available to process claims. the resulting claim payment patterns would be analyzed to determine whether or not the change in payment pattern represents a
change in ultimate claim liability.
such
an assessment requires considerable judgment. it is frequently not possible to determine whether a change in the data is an anomaly until sometime after the event. even if a change
is determined to be permanent, it is not always possible to reliably determine the extent of the change until sometime later. the overall detailed analyses supporting such an effort can take several
months to perform. this is because the underlying causes of the trends observed need to be evaluated, which may require the gathering or assembling of data not previously available. it may also
include interviews with experts involved with the underlying processes. as a result, there can be a time lag between the emergence of a change and a determination that the change should be reflected
in the company's estimated claim
liabilities. the final estimate selected by management in a reporting period is based on these various detailed analyses of past data, adjusted to reflect any new actionable information.
discussion of product lines
the following section details reserving considerations and common risk factors by product line. there are many additional risk factors
that may impact ultimate claim costs. each risk factor presented will have a different impact on required reserves. also, risk factors can have offsetting or compounding effects on required reserves.
for example, in workers' compensation, the use of expensive medical procedures that result in medical cost inflation may enable workers to return to work faster, thereby lowering indemnity costs.
thus, in almost all cases, it is impossible to discretely measure the effect of a single risk factor and construct a meaningful sensitivity expectation.
in
order to provide information on reasonably possible reserving changes by product line, the historical changes in year-end loss reserves over a one-year period
are provided for the u.s. product lines. this information is provided for both the company and the industry for the nine most recent years, and is based on the most recent publicly available data for
the reported line(s) that most closely match the individual product line being discussed. these changes were calculated, net of reinsurance, from statutory annual statement data found in
schedulep of those statements, and represent the reported reserve development on the beginning-of-the-year claim liabilities divided by the beginning claim
liabilities, all accident years combined, excluding non-defense related claim adjustment expense. data presented for the company includes history for the entire travelers group (u.s.
companies only), whether or not the individual subsidiaries were originally part of spc or tpc. this treatment is required by the statutory reporting instructions promulgated by state regulatory
authorities for schedulep. comparable data for non-u.s. companies is not available.
table of contents
general liability
general liability is generally considered a long tail line, as it takes a relatively long period of time to finalize and settle claims
from a given accident year. the speed of claim reporting and claim settlement is a function of the specific coverage provided, the jurisdiction and specific policy provisions such as
self-insured retentions. there are numerous
components underlying the general liability product line. some of these have relatively moderate payment patterns (with most of the claims for a given accident year closed within 5 to 7years),
while others can have extreme lags in both reporting and payment of claims (e.g.,a reporting lag of a decade or more for "construction defect" claims).
while
the majority of general liability coverages are written on an "occurrence" basis, certain general liability coverages (such as those covering directors and officers or professional
liability) are typically insured on a "claims-made" basis.
general
liability reserves are generally analyzed as two components: primary and excess/umbrella, with the primary component generally analyzed separately for bodily injury and property
damage. bodily injury liability payments reimburse the claimant for damages pertaining to physical injury as a result of the policyholder's legal obligation arising from non-intentional
acts such as negligence, subject to the insurance policy provisions. in some cases the damages can include future wage loss (which is a function of future earnings power and wage inflation) and future
medical treatment costs. property damage liability payments result from damages to the claimant's private property arising from the policyholder's legal obligation for non-intentional
acts. in most cases, property damage losses are a function of costs as of the loss date, or soon thereafter. in addition, sizable or unique exposures are reviewed separately. these exposures include
asbestos, environmental, other mass torts, construction defect, medical malpractice and large unique accounts that would otherwise distort the analysis. these unique categories often require a very
high degree of judgment and require reserve analyses that do not rely on traditional actuarial methods.
defense
costs are also a part of the insured costs covered by liability policies and can be significant, sometimes greater than the cost of the actual paid claims. for some products this
risk is mitigated by policy language such that the insured portion of defense costs erodes the amount of policy limit available to pay the claim. such "defense within the limits" policies are most
common for "claims-made" products. when defense costs are outside of the limits, amounts paid for defense costs do not erode the policy limits.
this
line is typically the largest source of reserve estimate uncertainty in the united states (excluding assumed reinsurance contracts covering the same risk). major contributors to
this reserve estimate uncertainty include the reporting lag (i.e.,the length of time between the event triggering coverage and the actual reporting of the claim), the number of parties
involved in the underlying tort action, whether the "event" triggering coverage is confined to only one time period or is spread over multiple time periods, the potential dollars involved (in the
individual claim actions), whether such claims were reasonably foreseeable and intended to be covered at the time the contracts were written (i.e.,coverage dispute potential), and the
potential for mass claim actions. claims with longer reporting lags result in greater inherent risk. this is especially true for alleged claims with a latency feature, particularly where courts have
ruled that coverage is spread over multiple policy years, hence involving multiple defendants (and their insurers and reinsurers) and multiple policies (thereby increasing the potential dollars
involved and the underlying settlement complexity). claims with long latencies also increase the potential recognition lag (i.e.,the lag between writing a type of policy in a certain market
and the recognition that such policies have potential mass tort and/or latent claim exposure).
the
amount of reserve estimate uncertainty also varies significantly by component for the general liability product line. the components in this product line with the longest latency,
longest reporting lags, largest potential dollars involved and greatest claim settlement complexity are asbestos and environmental. components that include latency, reporting lag and/or complexity
issues, but to a
table of contents
materially
lesser extent than asbestos and environmental, include construction defect, medical malpractice and other mass tort actions. many components of general liability are not subject to material
latency or claim complexity risks and hence have materially less uncertainty than the previously mentioned components. in general, policies providing coverage with shorter reporting lags, fewer
parties involved in settlement negotiations, only one policy potentially triggered per claim, fewer potential settlement dollars, reasonably foreseeable (and stable) potential hazards/claims and no
mass tort potential result in much less reserve estimate uncertainty than policies without those characteristics.
in
addition to the traditional actuarial methods mentioned in the general discussion section, the company utilizes various report year development and s-curve methods for the
construction defect components of this product line. the construction defect report year development analysis is supplemented with projected claim counts and average values for ibnr claim counts. for
components with greater lags in claim reporting, such as excess and umbrella components of this product line, the company relies more heavily on the bf method than on the paid and case incurred
development methods.
examples
of common risk factors, or perceptions thereof, that could change and, thus, affect the required general liability reserves (beyond those included in the general discussion
section) include:
general
liability risk factors
changes in claim handling philosophies
changes in policy provisions or court interpretation of such provisions
new theories of liability
trends in jury awards
changes in the propensity to sue, in general with specificity to particular issues
changes in statutes of limitations
changes in the underlying court system
distortions from losses resulting from large single accounts or single issues
changes in tort law
shifts in law suit mix between federal and state courts
changes in claim adjuster office structure (causing distortions in the data)
changes in settlement patterns (e.g.,medical malpractice)
general
liability book of business risk factors
changes in policy provisions (e.g.,deductibles, policy limits, endorsements)
changes in underwriting standards
product mix (e.g.,size of account, industries insured, jurisdiction mix)
unanticipated
changes in risk factors can affect reserves. as an indicator of the causal effect that a change in one or more risk factors could have on reserves for general liability
(excluding asbestos and environmental), a 1% increase (decrease) in incremental paid loss development for each future calendar year could result in a 1.5% increase (decrease) in loss reserves.
historically,
the one-year change in the reserve estimate for this product line, excluding estimated asbestos and environmental amounts, over the last nine years has varied
from -5% to 14% (averaging 5%) for the company and from -3% to 7% (averaging 2%) for the industry overall. the company's year-to-year changes are driven
by, and are based on, observed events during the year. because the high end of the company's range of historical adverse development comes from certain businesses that the company has since exited,
the company believes that the industry's range of historical outcomes is illustrative of reasonably possible one-year changes in reserve estimates for this product line. general liability
reserves (excluding asbestos and environmental) represent approximately 28% of the company's total loss reserves.
table of contents
the
company's change in reserve estimate for this product line, excluding estimated asbestos and environmental amounts, was -5% for 2008, -2% for 2007 and +2% for
2006. the 2008 change primarily reflected significant favorable prior year reserve development, driven by several factors, including improved legal and judicial environments, as well as enhanced risk
control, underwriting and claim process initiatives. the 2007 change was driven by better than expected loss development for recent accident years attributable to several factors, including improved
legal and judicial environments, as well as enhanced risk control, underwriting and claim process initiatives. the 2006 change largely resulted from directors and officers and errors and omissions
adjustments due to worse than expected large loss activity and additional information from detailed claim reviews, primarily associated with accident years 2002 and 2003.
property
property is generally considered a short tail line with a simpler and faster claim reporting and adjustment process than liability
coverages, and less uncertainty in the reserve setting process (except for more complex business interruption claims). it is generally viewed as a moderate frequency, low to moderate severity line,
except for catastrophes and coverage related to large properties. the claim reporting and settlement process for property coverage claim reserves is generally restricted to the insured and the
insurer. overall, the claim liabilities for this line create a low estimation risk, except possibly for catastrophes and business interruption claims.
property
reserves are typically analyzed in two components, one for catastrophic or other large single events, and another for all other events. examples of common risk factors, or
perceptions thereof, that could change and, thus, affect the required property reserves (beyond those included in the general discussion section) include:
property
risk factors
physical concentration of policyholders
availability and cost of local contractors
for the more severe catastrophic events, "demand surge" inflation, which refers to significant short-term increases in building material and labor costs due to a sharp increase in demand
for those materials and services
local building codes
amount of time to return property to full usage (for business interruption claims)
court interpretation of policy provisions (such as occurrence definition, or wind versus flooding)
lags in reporting claims (e.g.,winter damage to summer homes, hidden damage after an earthquake)
court or legislative changes to the statute of limitations
property
book of business risk factors
policy provisions mix (e.g.,deductibles, policy limits, endorsements)
changes in underwriting standards
unanticipated
changes in risk factors can affect reserves. as an indicator of the causal effect that a change in one or more risk factors could have on reserves for property, a 1%
increase (decrease) in incremental paid loss development for each future calendar year could result in a 1.1% increase (decrease) in loss reserves.
historically,
the one-year change in the reserve estimate for this product line over the last nine years has varied from -34% to 26% (averaging -6%)
for the company, and from -14% to 7% (averaging -2%) for the industry overall. the company's year-to-year changes are driven by, and are based on,
observed events during the year. because the high end of the company's range of historical adverse development comes from certain businesses that the company has since exited, the company believes
that the industry's range of historical outcomes is illustrative of reasonably possible one-year
table of contents
changes
in reserve estimates for this product line. property reserves represent approximately 4% of the company's total loss reserves.
while
property is considered a short tail coverage, the one year change for property can be more volatile than that for the longer tail product lines. this is due to the fact that the
majority of the reserve for property relates to the most recent accident year, which is subject to the most uncertainty for all product lines. this recent accident year uncertainty is relevant to
property because of weather related events which tend to be concentrated in the second half of the year, and generally are not completely resolved until the following year. reserve estimates
associated with major catastrophes may take even longer to resolve. the reserve estimates for this product line are also potentially subject to material changes due to uncertainty in measuring
ultimate losses for unprecedented significant catastrophes such as the events of september11, 2001 and hurricane katrina.
the
company's change in reserve estimate for this product line was -22% for 2008, -18% for 2007 and -11% for 2006. the 2008 change was primarily
driven by favorable development in the 2007 accident year for certain large property, ocean marine and inland marine claim exposures, and improvements in the litigation environment relating to, and
ongoing claim settlements for, hurricane katrina. the 2007 change was due to fewer than expected late reported claims related to non-catastrophe weather events that occurred late in 2006
as well as better than expected frequency and severity due in part to changes in the marketplace, such as higher deductibles and lower policy limits. in addition, the property product line experienced
better than expected large loss outcomes which were partially attributable to favorable litigation resolutions. the 2006 change primarily reflected less "demand surge" inflation than originally
estimated for 2005 accident year non-catastrophe and catastrophe losses.
commercial multi-peril
commercial multi-peril provides a combination of property and liability coverage typically for small businesses and, therefore,
includes both short and long tail coverages. for
property coverage, it generally takes a relatively short period of time to close claims, while for the other coverages, generally for the liability coverages, it takes a longer period of time to close
claims.
the
reserving risk for this line is dominated by the liability coverage portion of this product, except occasionally in the event of catastrophic or large single losses. the reserving
risk for this line differs from that of the general liability product line and the property product line due to the nature of the customer. commercial multi-peril is generally sold to smaller-sized
accounts, while the customer profile for general liability and property includes larger customers.
see
"property risk factors" and "general liability risk factors," discussed above, with regard to reserving risk for commercial multi-peril.
unanticipated
changes in risk factors can affect reserves. as an indicator of the causal effect that a change in one or more risk factors could have on reserves for commercial
multi-peril (excluding asbestos and environmental), a 1% increase (decrease) in incremental paid loss development for each future calendar year could result in a 1.2% increase (decrease) in loss
reserves.
historically,
the one-year change in the reserve estimate for this product line over the last nine years has varied from -16% to 2% (averaging -5%)
for the company, and from -3% to 6% (averaging 2%) for the industry overall. the company's year-to-year changes are driven by, and are based on, observed events
during the year. the company believes that its range of historical outcomes is illustrative of reasonably possible one-year changes in reserve estimates for this product line. commercial
multi-peril reserves (excluding asbestos and environmental reserves) represent approximately 7% of the company's total loss reserves.
table of contents
as
discussed above, this line combines general liability and property coverages and it has been impacted in the past by many of the same events as those two lines.
the
company's change in reserve estimate for this product line was -16% for 2008, -8% for 2007 and -4% for 2006. the 2008 change was attributable to
several factors, including improved legal and judicial environments, and enhanced risk control, underwriting and claim process initiatives. also contributing to the change was improvement in the
litigation environment relating to, and ongoing claim settlements for, hurricane katrina. the 2007 and 2006 changes were attributable to better than expected results due to, among other factors,
increasingly
favorable legal and judicial environments as well as enhanced risk control, underwriting and claim process initiatives.
commercial automobile
the commercial automobile product line is a mix of property and liability coverages and, therefore, includes both short and long tail
coverages. the payments that are made quickly typically pertain to auto physical damage (property) claims and property damage (liability) claims. the payments that take longer to finalize and are more
difficult to estimate relate to bodily injury claims. in general, claim reporting lags are minor, claim complexity is not a major issue, and the line is viewed as high frequency, low to moderate
severity. overall, the claim liabilities for this line create a moderate estimation risk.
commercial
automobile reserves are typically analyzed in four components: bodily injury liability; property damage liability; collision claims; and comprehensive claims. these last two
components have minimum reserve risk and fast payouts and, accordingly, separate risk factors are not presented.
the
company utilizes the traditional actuarial methods mentioned in the general discussion above in estimating claim liabilities for this line. this is supplemented with detailed custom
analyses where needed.
examples
of common risk factors, or perceptions thereof, that could change and, thus, affect the required commercial automobile reserves (beyond those included in the general discussion
section) include:
bodily
injury and property damage liability risk factors
trends in jury awards
changes in the underlying court system
changes in case law
litigation trends
frequency of claims with payment capped by policy limits
change in average severity of accidents, or proportion of severe accidents
changes in auto safety technology
subrogation opportunities
changes in claim handling philosophies
frequency of visits to health providers
number of medical procedures given during visits to health providers
types of health providers used
types of medical treatments received
changes in cost of medical treatments
degree of patient responsiveness to treatment
commercial
automobile book of business risk factors
changes in policy provisions (e.g.,deductibles, policy limits, endorsements, etc.)
changes in mix of insured vehicles (e.g.,long haul trucks versus local and smaller vehicles, fleet risks versus non-fleets)
changes in underwriting standards
table of contents
unanticipated changes in risk factors can affect reserves. as an indicator of the causal effect that a change in one or more risk factors could have on reserves
for commercial automobile, a 1% increase (decrease) in incremental paid loss development for each future calendar year could result in a 1.2% increase (decrease) in loss reserves.
historically,
the one-year change in the reserve estimate for this product line over the last nine years has varied from -10% to 9% (averaging -1%)
for the company, and from -3% to 9% (averaging 2%) for the industry overall. the company's year-to-year changes are driven by, and are based on, observed events
during the year. the company believes that its range of historical outcomes is illustrative of reasonably possible one-year changes in reserve estimates for this product line. commercial
automobile reserves represent approximately 7% of the company's total loss reserves.
the
company's change in reserve estimate for this product line was -7% for 2008, -10% for 2007 and -7% for 2006. the 2008 change was a result of
better than expected loss development, primarily for accident years 2005 through 2007, which was attributable to several factors, including improved legal and judicial environments, and enhanced risk
control, underwriting and claim process initiatives. the 2007 change was due to better than expected loss development, for recent accident years, as a result of more favorable legal and judicial
environments, claim handling initiatives and improvements in auto safety technology. the 2006 change was due to better than expected loss development, primarily for accident years 2003 through 2005,
which was
attributable to favorable legal and judicial environments, claim handling initiatives and improvements in auto safety technology.
workers' compensation
workers' compensation is generally considered a long tail coverage, as it takes a relatively long period of time to finalize claims
from a given accident year. while certain payments such as initial medical treatment or temporary wage replacement for the injured worker are made quickly, some other payments are made over the course
of several years, such as awards for permanent partial injuries. in addition, some payments can run as long as the injured worker's life, such as permanent disability benefits and on-going
medical care. despite the possibility of long payment tails, the reporting lags are generally short, settlements are generally not complex, and most of the liability can be considered high frequency
with moderate severity. the largest reserve risk generally comes from the low frequency, high severity claims providing lifetime coverage for medical expense arising from a worker's injury. overall,
the claim liabilities for this line create a somewhat greater than moderate estimation risk.
workers'
compensation reserves are typically analyzed in three components: indemnity losses, medical losses and claim adjustment expenses.
examples
of common risk factors, or perceptions thereof, that could change and, thus, affect the required workers' compensation reserves (beyond those included in the general discussion
section) include:
indemnity
risk factors
time required to recover from the injury
degree of available transitional jobs
degree of legal involvement
changes in the interpretations and processes of the workers' compensation commissions' oversight of claims(1)
future wage inflation for states that index benefits
changes in the administrative policies of second injury funds
(1)these
are administrative bodies that evaluate whether or not a given claim for workers' compensation benefits is valid. their duties include the
determination of whether a given injury arose out of the scope of employment or the determination of the degree of injury where disputes exist.
table of contents
medical
risk factors
changes in the cost of medical treatments (including prescription drugs) and underlying fee schedules ("inflation")
frequency of visits to health providers
number of medical procedures given during visits to health providers
types of health providers used
type of medical treatments received
use of preferred provider networks and other medical cost containment practices
availability of new medical processes and equipment
changes in the use of pharmaceutical drugs
degree of patient responsiveness to treatment
general
workers' compensation risk factors
frequency of claim reopenings on claims previously closed
mortality trends of injured workers with lifetime benefits and medical treatment
degree of cost shifting between workers' compensation and health insurance
workers'
compensation book of business risk factors
product mix
injury type mix
changes in underwriting standards
unanticipated
changes in risk factors can affect reserves. as an indicator of the causal effect that a change in one or more risk factors could have on reserves for workers'
compensation, a 1% increase (decrease) in incremental paid loss development for each future calendar year could result in a 1.3% increase (decrease) in loss reserves.
historically,
the one-year change in the reserve estimate for this product line over the last nine years has varied from -2% to 2% (averaging 0%) for the company,
and from -1% to 4% (averaging 1%) for the industry overall. the company's year-to-year changes are driven by, and are based on, observed events during the year. the
company believes that its range of historical outcomes is illustrative of reasonably possible one-year changes in reserve estimates for this product line. workers' compensation reserves
represent approximately 30% of the company's total loss reserves.
the
company's change in reserve estimate for this product line was 1% for 2008, and 0% for 2007 and 2006. the 2008 change was primarily driven by higher than anticipated medical costs
related to claims from older accident years.
fidelity and surety
fidelity is generally considered a short tail coverage. it takes a relatively short period of time to finalize and settle fidelity
claims. the volatility of fidelity reserves is generally related to the type of business of the insured, the size and complexity of the insured's business operations, amount of policy limit and
attachment point of coverage. the uncertainty surrounding reserves for small, commercial insureds is typically less than the uncertainty for large commercial or financial institutions. the high
frequency, low severity nature of small commercial fidelity losses provides for stability in loss estimates whereas, the low frequency, high severity nature of losses for large insureds results in a
wider range of ultimate loss outcomes. actuarial techniques that rely on a stable pattern of loss development are generally not applicable to low frequency, high severity policies.
surety
has certain components that are generally considered short tail coverages with short reporting lags, although large individual construction and commercial surety contracts can
result in a long settlement tail, based on the length and complexity of the construction project or commercial transaction being insured. (large construction projects can take many years to complete.)
the
table of contents
frequency
of losses in surety correlates with economic cycles as the primary cause of surety loss is the inability to perform financially. the volatility of surety losses is generally related to the
type of business performed by the insured, the type of bonded obligation, the amount of limit exposed to loss and the amount of assets available to the insurer to mitigate losses, such as unbilled
contract funds, collateral, first and third party indemnity, and other security positions of an insured's assets. certain classes of surety claims are very high severity, low frequency in nature.
these can include large construction contractors involved with one or multiple large, complex projects as well as certain large commercial surety exposures. other claim factors affecting reserve
variability of surety include litigation related to amounts owed by and due the insured (e.g.,salvage and subrogation efforts) and the results of financial restructuring of an insured.
examples
of common risk factors, or perceptions thereof, that could change and, thus, affect the required fidelity and surety reserves (beyond those included in the general discussion
section) include:
fidelity
risk factors
type of business of insured
policy limit and attachment points
third-party claims
coverage litigation
complexity of claims
growth in insureds' operations
surety
risk factors
economic trends, including the general level of construction activity
concentration of reserves in a relatively few large claims
type of business insured
type of obligation insured
cumulative limits of liability for insured
assets available to mitigate loss
defective workmanship/latent defects
financial strategy of insured
changes in statutory obligations
geographic spread of business
fidelity
and surety book of business risk factors
changes in policy provisions (e.g.,deductibles, limits, endorsements)
changes in underwriting standards
unanticipated
changes in risk factors can affect reserves. as an indicator of the causal effect that a change in one or more risk factors could have on reserves for fidelity and surety,
a 1% increase (decrease) in incremental paid loss development for each future calendar year could result in a 1.4% increase (decrease) in loss reserves.
historically,
the one-year change in the reserve estimate for this product line over the last nine years has varied from -10% to 138% (averaging 21%) for the
company, and from -11% to 24% (averaging 6%) for the industry overall. the company's year-to-year changes are driven by, and are based on, observed events during
the year. because the high end of the company's range was due to acquired business in 2004, the company believes that the industry's range of historical outcomes is illustrative of reasonably possible
one-year changes in reserve estimates for this product line. fidelity and surety reserves represent approximately 3% of the company's total loss reserves.
in
general, developments on single large claims (both adverse and favorable) are a primary source of changes in reserve estimates for this product line.
table of contents
the
company's change in reserve estimate for this product line was -10% for 2008, -1% for 2007 and -5% for 2006. the 2008 change was a result of
better than expected loss experience for the contract surety business within this product line, primarily driven by favorable settlements on large claims from older accident years. the 2006 change was
due to better than expected large loss activity.
personal automobile
personal automobile includes both short and long tail coverages. the payments that are made quickly typically pertain to auto physical
damage (property) claims and property damage (liability) claims. the payments that take longer to finalize and are more difficult to estimate relate to bodily injury claims. reporting lags are
relatively short and the claim settlement process for personal automobile liability generally is the least complex of the liability products. it is generally viewed as a high frequency, low to
moderate severity product line. overall, the claim liabilities for this line create a moderate estimation risk.
personal
automobile reserves are typically analyzed in five components: bodily injury liability, property damage liability, no-fault losses, collision claims and
comprehensive claims. these last two components have minimum reserve risk and fast payouts and, accordingly, separate factors are not presented.
examples
of common risk factors, or perceptions thereof, that could change and, thus, affect the required personal automobile reserves (beyond those included in the general reserve
discussion section) include:
bodily
injury and property damage liability risk factors
trends in jury awards
changes in the underlying court system and its philosophy
changes in case law
litigation trends
frequency of claims with payment capped by policy limits
change in average severity of accidents, or proportion of severe accidents
subrogation opportunities
degree of patient responsiveness to treatment
changes in claim handling philosophies
no-fault
risk factors (for selected states and time periods)
effectiveness of no-fault laws
frequency of visits to health providers
number of medical procedures given during visits to health providers
types of health providers used
types of medical treatments received
changes in cost of medical treatments
degree of patient responsiveness to treatment
personal
automobile book of business risk factors
changes in policy provisions (e.g.,deductibles, policy limits, endorsements, etc.)
changes in underwriting standards
changes in the use of credit data for rating and underwriting
unanticipated
changes in risk factors can affect reserves. as an indicator of the causal effect that a change in one or more risk factors could have on reserves for personal automobile,
a 1% increase (decrease) in incremental paid loss development for each future calendar year could result in a 1.1% increase (decrease) in loss reserves.
table of contents
historically,
the one-year change in the reserve estimate for this product line over the last nine years has varied from -9% to 1% (averaging -4%) for
the company, and from -4% to 0% (averaging -2%) for the industry overall. the company's year-to-year changes are driven by, and are based on, observed
events during the year. the company believes that its range of historical outcomes is illustrative of reasonably possible one-year changes in reserve estimates for this product line.
personal automobile reserves represent approximately 5% of the company's total loss reserves.
the
company's change in reserve estimate for this product line was -1% for 2008, -5% for 2007 and -7% for 2006. the decreases in 2008, 2007 and 2006
were primarily due to better than expected results from changes in claim handling practices as well as initiatives to fight fraud.
homeowners and personal lines other
homeowners is generally considered a short tail coverage. most payments are related to the property portion of the policy, where the
claim reporting and settlement process is generally restricted to the insured and the insurer. claims on property coverage are typically reported soon after the actual damage occurs, although delays
of several months are not unusual. the claim is settled when the two parties agree on the amount due in accordance with the policy contract language and the appropriate payment is made (or
alternatively, the property replacement/repair is performed by the insurer). the resulting settlement process is typically fairly short term, although exceptions do exist.
the
liability portion of the homeowners policy generates claims which take longer to pay due to the involvement of litigation and negotiation, but with generally small reporting lags. in
addition, reserves related to umbrella coverages have greater uncertainty since umbrella liability payments are often made far into the future.
overall,
the line is generally high frequency, low to moderate severity (except for catastrophes), with simple to moderate claim complexity.
homeowners
reserves are typically analyzed in two components: non-catastrophe related losses and catastrophe loss payments.
examples
of common risk factors, or perceptions thereof, that could change and, thus, affect the required homeowners reserves (beyond those included in the general discussion section)
include:
non-catastrophe
risk factors
salvage opportunities
amount of time to return property to residential use
changes in weather patterns
local building codes
litigation trends
trends in jury awards
catastrophe
risk factors
physical concentration of policyholders
availability and cost of local contractors
local building codes
quality of construction of damaged homes
amount of time to return property to residential use
for the more severe catastrophic events, "demand surge" inflation, which refers to significant short-term increases in building material and labor costs due to a sharp increase in demand
for those materials and services
table of contents
homeowners
book of business risk factors
policy provisions mix (e.g.,deductibles, policy limits, endorsements, etc.)
degree of concentration of policyholders
changes in underwriting standards
changes in the use of credit data for rating and underwriting
unanticipated
changes in risk factors can affect reserves. as an indicator of the causal effect that a change in one or more risk factors could have on reserves for homeowners and
personal lines other, a 1% increase (decrease) in incremental paid loss development for each future calendar year could result in a 1.1% increase (decrease) in loss reserves.
historically,
the one-year change in the reserve estimate for this product line over the last nine years has varied from -31% to 3% (averaging -11%)
for the company, and from -8% to 11% (averaging -2%) for the industry overall. the company's year-to-year changes are driven by, and are based on,
observed events during the year. the company believes that its range of historical outcomes is illustrative of reasonably possible one-year changes in reserve estimates for this product
line. homeowners and personal lines other reserves represent approximately 3% of the company's total loss reserves.
this
line combines both liability and property coverages; however, the majority of the reserves relate to property. while property is considered a short tail coverage, the one year
change for property can be more volatile than that for the longer tail product lines. this is due to the fact that the majority of the reserve for property relates to the most recent accident year,
which is subject to the most uncertainty for all product lines. this recent accident year uncertainty is relevant to property because of weather related events which tend to be concentrated in the
second half of the year, and generally are not completely resolved until the following year. reserve estimates associated with major catastrophes may take even longer to resolve.
the
company's change in reserve estimate for this product line was -13% for 2008, -3% for 2007 and -22% for 2006. the 2008 change was primarily driven
by favorable loss experience related to hurricane katrina, by claim initiatives, by better than expected outcomes on 2007 catastrophe-related claims and by improvements in older accident years for the
umbrella line. the 2007 change was due to fewer than expected late reported claims related to non-catastrophe weather events that occurred in the fourth quarter of 2006. in addition, a
portion of the change was attributable to a decrease in the number of claims due to changes in the marketplace, including higher deductibles and fewer small-dollar claims. the 2006 change was due to
lower than expected additional living expenses related to hurricane katrina as well as better than expected non-catastrophe related frequency and severity, due in part to changes in the
marketplace, such as higher deductibles and fewer small-dollar claims, and continued evidence of a less than expected impact from demand surge.
international and other
international and other includes products written by international and other products not discussed above. the principal component of
"other" claim reserves is assumed reinsurance written on an excess-of-loss basis, which may include reinsurance of non-u.s. exposures, and is runoff business.
international
and other claim liabilities result from a mix of coverages, currencies and jurisdictions/countries. the common characteristic is the need to customize the analysis to the
individual component, and the inability to rely on data characterizations and reporting requirements in the u.s. statutory reporting framework.
due
to changes in the business mix for this line over time, the recently incurred claim liabilities are relatively short term (due to both the products and the jurisdictions involved,
e.g.,the republic of ireland and the united kingdom), while the older liabilities include some from runoff operations that
table of contents
are
extremely long tail (e.g.,u.s. excess liabilities reinsured through the london market, and several underwriting pools in runoff). the speed of claim reporting and claim settlement is a
function of the specific coverage provided, the jurisdiction, the distribution system (e.g.,underwriting pool versus direct) and the proximity of the insurance sale to the insured hazard
(e.g.,insured and insurer located in different countries). in particular, liabilities arising from the underwriting pools in runoff may result in significant reporting lags, settlement lags
and claim complexity, due to the need to coordinate with other pool members or co-insurers through a broker or lead-insurer for claim settlement purposes.
international
and other reserves are generally analyzed by program/pool, country and general coverage category (e.g.,u.s. liabilityexcess of loss reinsurance, or
general liabilitymunicipalitiesby country). the business is also generally split by direct versus assumed reinsurance for a given coverage/jurisdiction. where the underlying
insured hazard is outside the united states, the underlying coverages are generally similar to those described under the general liability and automobile discussion above, but under a different legal
system. where the underlying hazard is within the u.s., the coverage involved is typically that of general liability, but on an excess or excess-of-loss reinsurance basis.
excess exposure requires the insured to "prove" not only claims under the policy, but also the prior payment of claims reaching up to the excess policy's attachment point.
examples
of common risk factors, or perceptions thereof, that could change and, thus, affect the required international and other reserves (beyond those included in the general
discussion section) include:
international
and other risk factors
changes in claim handling procedures, including those of the primary carriers
changes in policy provisions or court interpretation of such provision
new theories of liability
trends in jury awards
changes in the propensity to sue
changes in statutes of limitations
changes in the underlying court system
distortions from losses resulting from large single accounts or single issues
changes in tort law
changes in claim adjuster office structure (causing distortions in the data)
international
and other book of business risk factors
changes in policy provisions (e.g.,deductibles, policy limits, endorsements, "claims-made" language)
changes in underwriting standards
product mix (e.g.,size of account, industries insured, jurisdiction mix)
unanticipated
changes in risk factors can affect reserves. as an indicator of the causal effect that a change in one or more risk factors could have on reserves for international and
other (excluding asbestos and environmental), a 1% increase (decrease) in incremental paid loss development for each future calendar year could result in a 1.3% increase (decrease) in loss reserves.
international and other reserves (excluding asbestos and environmental) represent approximately 7% of the company's total loss reserves.
international
and other represents a combination of different product lines, some of which are in runoff. comparative historical information is not available for international product
lines as insurers domiciled outside of the u.s. do not fileu.s. statutory reports. comparative historical information on runoff business is not indicative of reasonably possible
one-year changes in the reserve estimate for this mix of runoff business. accordingly, the company has not included comparative analyses for international and other.
table of contents
reinsurance recoverables
amounts recoverable from reinsurers are estimated in a manner consistent with the associated claim liability. the company evaluates and
monitors the financial condition of its reinsurers under voluntary reinsurance arrangements to minimize its exposure to significant losses from reinsurer insolvencies. in addition, in the ordinary
course of business, the company becomes involved in coverage disputes with its reinsurers. some of these disputes could result in lawsuits and arbitrations brought by or against the reinsurers to
determine the company's rights and obligations under the various reinsurance agreements. the company employs dedicated specialists and aggressive strategies to manage reinsurance collections and
disputes.
the
company reports its reinsurance recoverables net of an allowance for estimated uncollectible reinsurance recoverables. the allowance is based upon the company's ongoing review of
amounts outstanding, length of collection periods, changes in reinsurer credit standing, disputes, applicable coverage defenses and other relevant factors. accordingly, the establishment of
reinsurance recoverables and the related allowance for uncollectible reinsurance recoverables is also an inherently uncertain process involving estimates. from time to time, as a result of the
long-tailed nature of the underlying liabilities, coverage complexities and potential for disputes, the company considers the commutation of reinsurance contracts. changes in estimated reinsurance
recoverables and commutation activity could result in additional income statement charges. total reinsurance recoverables at december31, 2008 declined by $1.41billion from the same
date in 2007, primarily reflecting the sale of unionamerica, various commutation agreements and collections on reinsurance recoverables, including those related to prior year hurricane losses. the
allowance for uncollectible reinsurance at december31, 2008 declined by $70million from the same date in 2007, generally due to settlement activity and commutations.
recoverables
attributable to structured settlements relate primarily to personal injury claims, of which workers' compensation claims comprise a significant portion, for which the
company has purchased annuities and remains contingently liable in the event of a default by the companies issuing the annuities. recoverables attributable to mandatory pools and associations relate
primarily to workers' compensation service business and have the obligation of the participating insurance companies on a joint and several basis supporting these cessions.
the
following table summarizes the composition of the company's reinsurance recoverable assets:
(at december31, in millions)
gross reinsurance recoverables on paid and unpaid claims and claim adjustment expenses
$
9,376
$
10,731
allowance for uncollectible reinsurance
(618
)
(688
)
net reinsurance recoverables
8,758
10,043
structured settlements
3,517
3,615
mandatory pools and associations
1,957
1,983
total reinsurance recoverables
$
14,232
$
15,641
investment valuation and impairments
fair value measurements
the company's estimates of fair value for financial assets and financial liabilities are based on the framework established in
fasbstatement no.157, fair value measurements (fas157). the framework is based on the inputs used in valuation and gives the
highest priority to quoted prices in active markets and requires that observable inputs be used in the valuations when available. the disclosure of fair value estimates in the fas157 hierarchy
is based on whether the significant inputs into the
table of contents
valuation
are observable. in determining the level of the hierarchy in which the estimate is disclosed, the highest priority is given to unadjusted quoted prices in active markets and the lowest
priority to unobservable inputs that reflect the company's significant market assumptions. the three levels of the hierarchy are as follows:
level1unadjusted
quoted market prices for identical assets or liabilities in active markets that the company has the ability
to access.
level2quoted
prices for similar assets or liabilities in active markets; quoted prices for identical or similar assets or
liabilities in inactive markets; or valuations based on models where the significant inputs are observable (e.g.,interest rates, yield curves, prepayment speeds, default rates, loss
severities, etc.) or can be corroborated by observable market data.
level3valuations
based on models where significant inputs are not observable. the unobservable inputs reflect the company's
own assumptions about the inputs that market participants would use.
valuation of investments reported at fair value in financial statements
the fair value of a financial instrument is the estimated amount at which the instrument could be exchanged in an orderly transaction
between knowledgeable, unrelated willing parties, i.e.,not in a forced transaction. the estimated fair value of a financial instrument may differ from the amount that could be realized if the
security was sold in an immediate sale, e.g., a forced transaction. additionally, the valuation of fixed maturity investments is more subjective when markets are less liquid due to the lack of market
based inputs, which may increase the potential that the estimated fair value (i.e.,the carrying amount) of an investment is not reflective of the price at which an actual transaction would
occur.
for
investments that have quoted market prices in active markets, the company uses the quoted market prices as fair value and includes these prices in the amounts disclosed in
level1 of the hierarchy. the company receives the quoted market prices from a third party, nationally recognized pricing service (pricing service). when quoted market prices are unavailable,
the company utilizes a pricing service to determine an estimate of fair value, which is mainly for its fixed maturity investments. the fair value estimates provided from this pricing service are
included in the amount disclosed in level2 of the hierarchy. if quoted market prices and an estimate from a pricing service are unavailable, the company produces an estimate of fair value
based on internally developed valuation techniques, which, depending on the level of observable market inputs, will render the fair value estimate as level2 or level3. the company
bases all of its estimates of fair value for assets on the bid price as it represents what a third party market participant would be willing to pay in an arm's length transaction.
fixed maturities
the company utilizes a pricing service to estimate fair value measurements for approximately 99% of its fixed maturities. the pricing
service utilizes market quotations for fixed maturity securities that have quoted prices in active markets. since fixed maturities other than u.s. treasury securities generally do not trade on a daily
basis, the pricing service prepares estimates of fair value measurements for these securities using its proprietary pricing applications which include available relevant market information, benchmark
curves, benchmarking of like securities, sector groupings, and matrix pricing. additionally, the pricing service uses an option adjusted spread model to develop prepayment and interest rate scenarios.
the
pricing service evaluates each asset class based on relevant market information, relevant credit information, perceived market movements and sector news. the market inputs utilized
in the pricing
table of contents
evaluation,
listed in the approximate order of priority, include: benchmark yields, reported trades, broker/dealer quotes, issuer spreads, two-sided markets, benchmark securities, bids,
offers, reference data, and industry and economic events. the extent of the use of each market input depends on the asset class and the market conditions. depending on the security, the priority of
the use of inputs may change or some market inputs may not be relevant. for some securities additional inputs may be necessary.
the
pricing service utilized by the company has indicated that they will only produce an estimate of fair value if there is objectively verifiable information to produce a valuation. if
the pricing service discontinues pricing an investment, the company would be required to produce an estimate of fair value using some of the same methodologies as the pricing service, but would have
to make assumptions for market-based inputs that are unavailable due to market conditions.
the
fair value estimates of most fixed maturity investments are based on observable market information rather than market quotes. accordingly, the estimates of fair value for such fixed
maturities, other than u.s. treasury securities, provided by the pricing service are included in the amount disclosed in level2 of the hierarchy. the estimated fair value of u.s. treasury
securities is included in the amount disclosed in level1 as the estimates are based on unadjusted market prices.
the
company reviews the estimates of fair value provided by the pricing service and compares the estimates to the company's knowledge of the market to determine if the estimates obtained
are representative of the prices in the market. the company produces a report monthly that lists all price changes from the previous month in excess of 10%. the company reviews the report and will
challenge any prices deemed not to be representative of fair value. in addition, the company has implemented various other processes including randomly selecting purchased or sold securities and
comparing execution prices to the estimates from the pricing service as well as reviewing reports that contain securities whose valuation did not change from their previous valuation (stale price
review). these processes were implemented in mid-2007 and have not highlighted any significant issues with the fair value estimates received from the pricing service.
during
the fourth quarter of 2008, the company began using additional independent pricing services to further test the primary pricing service's valuation of the company's fixed maturity
portfolio, and will continue to use such additional pricing services in future quarters. using certain month-end data from october and november 2008, the secondary pricing services
provided fair value estimates on approximately 98% of the fixed maturity portfolio, and those estimates, in the aggregate, were not materially different than the estimated fair value provided by the
company's primary pricing service.
the
company holds privately placed corporate bonds and estimates the fair value of these bonds using an internal matrix that is based on market information regarding interest rates,
credit spreads and liquidity. the underlying source data for calculating the matrix of credit spreads relative to the u.s. treasury curve are the merrill lynch u.s. corporate index and the merrill
lynch high yield bb rated index. the company includes the fair value estimates of these corporate bonds in level2, since all significant inputs are market observable. as many of these
securities are issued by public companies, the company compares the estimates of fair value to the fair values of these companies' publicly traded debt to test the validity of the internal pricing
matrix.
while
the vast majority of the company's municipal bonds are included in level2, the company holds a small number of municipal bonds which are not valued by the pricing service
and estimates the fair value of these bonds using an internal pricing matrix with some unobservable inputs that are significant to the valuation. due to the limited amount of observable market
information, the company includes the fair value estimates for these particular bonds in level3. additionally, the company holds a small amount of fixed maturities that have characteristics
that make them unsuitable for matrix pricing. for these fixed maturities, the company obtains a quote from a broker (typically a market
table of contents
maker).
due to the disclaimers on the quotes that indicate that the price is indicative only, the company includes these fair value estimates in level3.
equitiespublic common and preferred
for public common and preferred stocks, the company receives prices from a nationally recognized pricing service that are based on
observable market transactions and includes these estimates in the amount disclosed in level1. infrequently, current market quotes in active markets are unavailable for certain
non-redeemable preferred stocks held by the company. in these instances, the company receives an estimate of fair value from the pricing service that provides fair value estimates for the
company's fixed maturities. the service utilizes some of the same methodologies to price the non-redeemable preferred stocks as it does for the fixed maturities. the company includes the
estimate in the amount disclosed in level2.
other investments
venture capital investments and non-public common and preferred equity securities
the
company holds investments in venture capital investments and non-public common and preferred stocks, with a fair value estimate of
$224million, reported in other investments, where the fair value estimate is determined either internally or by an external fund manager based on recent filings, operating results, balance
sheet stability, growth and other business and market sector fundamentals. the company holds shares of common stock of one private company with a fair value estimate of $162million at
december31, 2008, for which the estimate of fair value is provided by a third party appraiser on behalf of the investee and adjusted for a liquidity discount which takes into consideration the
transfer restrictions on the common stock. due to the significant unobservable inputs in these valuations, the company includes the total fair value estimate for all of these investments at
december31, 2008 in the amount disclosed in level3.
derivatives
the company uses derivatives generally to hedge its net investment in a foreign subsidiary. the company also holds
non-public warrants in a public company and has convertible bonds containing embedded conversion options that are reported separately from the host bond contract. for the derivatives used
to hedge the net investment of a foreign subsidiary, the company uses quoted market prices to estimate fair value and includes the fair value estimate, which was in a liability position of
approximately $2million at december31, 2008, in level1. the company estimates fair value for the warrants using an option pricing model with observable market inputs. because
the warrants are not market traded and information concerning market participants is not available, the company includes the fair value estimate of $87million at december31, 2008 in
the amount disclosed in level3other investments. the company separately values the embedded conversion options based on observable market inputs and includes the estimate of fair
value in level2.
valuation of investments not reported at fair value in financial statements
short-term securities
the company's short-term investments consist mainly of high-quality commercial paper (primarily a1/p1) with an
average of 39days to maturity at december31, 2008. additionally, it is the company's policy to not invest in structured products for its short-term investments. the company
believes that there is insignificant credit risk in its short-term portfolio and that amortized cost approximates fair value. the company includes short-term investments in its
impairment monitoring to identify any credit issues.
table of contents
real estate
real estate is recorded on the purchase date at the purchase price, which generally represents fair value, and is supported by internal
analysis or external appraisals, using discounted cash flow analyses and other acceptable valuation techniques. real estate is subsequently carried at the company's cost, net of depreciation.
other investments
the company's investment portfolio includes other investments not carried at fair value which include private equity limited
partnerships, hedge funds, real estate partnerships (together, partnerships), joint ventures, and mortgage loans. the company uses the equity method of accounting for its investments in partnerships
and joint ventures, and amortized cost is used for mortgage loans.
the
partnerships generally report investments on their balance sheet at fair value. the financial statements prepared by the investee are received by the company on a lag basis, with the
lag period generally dependent upon the type of underlying investments. the private equity partnerships and real estate partnerships provide financial information quarterly which is generally
available to investors, including the company, within three to six months following the date of the reporting period. the hedge funds provide financial information monthly, which is generally
available to investors within one month following the date of the reporting period. the company regularly requests financial information from the partnerships prior to the receipt of the partnerships'
financial statements, and records any material information obtained from these requests in the financial statements.
investment impairments
the company recognizes an impairment loss when an invested asset's value declines below cost, adjusted for accretion, amortization and
previous other-than-temporary impairments (new cost basis), and it is determined that the decline is other-than-temporary. some of the factors
considered in evaluating whether a decline in fair value is other-than-temporary include: (1)the company's ability and intent to retain the investment for a period of
time sufficient to allow for an anticipated recovery in value; (2)the recoverability of principal and interest for fixed maturity securities, or cost for equity securities; (3)the
length of time and extent to which the fair value has been less than amortized cost for fixed maturity securities, or cost for equity securities; and (4)the financial condition,
near-term and long-term prospects for the issuer, including the relevant industry conditions and trends, and implications of rating agency actions and offering prices. when the
company determines that an invested asset is other-than-temporarily impaired, the invested asset is written down to fair value, and the amount of the impairment is included in
earnings as a realized investment loss. the fair value then becomes the new cost basis of the investment, and any subsequent recoveries in fair value, other than amounts accreted to the expected
recovery amount, are recognized at disposition. due to the subjective nature of the company's analysis and estimates of fair value, along with the judgment that must be applied in the analysis, it is
possible that the company could reach a different conclusion whether or not to impair a security if it had access to additional information about the investee. additionally, it is possible that the
investee's ability to meet future contractual obligations may be different than what the company determined during its analysis, which may lead to a different impairment conclusion in future periods.
the
company recognizes a realized loss when impairment is deemed to be other-than-temporary even if a decision to sell an invested asset has not been made. when
the company has decided to sell a temporarily impaired available-for-sale invested asset and the company does not expect the fair value of the invested asset to fully recover
prior to the expected time of sale, the invested asset is deemed to be other-than-temporarily impaired in the period in which the decision to sell is made.
table of contents
the
company's process for identifying and reviewing invested assets for impairments during any quarter includes the following:
identification and evaluation of investments that have possible indications of
other-than-temporary impairment, which includes an analysis of all investments with gross unrealized investment losses that have fair values less than 80% of cost;
review and evaluation of external and internal portfolio managers' recommendations for
other-than-temporary impairments of any other investments based on the investee's current financial condition, liquidity, near-term recovery prospects, the outlook
for the business sectors in which the investee operates and other factors (in addition to reviewing investments with an estimated fair value of less than 80% of cost);
consideration of evidential matter, including an evaluation of factors or triggers that may or may not cause individual
investments to qualify as having other-than-temporary impairments; and
determination of the status of each analyzed investment as other-than-temporary or not, with
documentation of the rationale for the decision.
sales of temporarily impaired invested assets
the company may, from time to time, sell invested assets subsequent to the balance sheet date that were considered temporarily impaired
at the balance sheet date. such sales
are generally due to events occurring subsequent to the balance sheet date that result in a change in the company's intent or ability to hold an invested asset. the types of events that may result in
a sale include significant changes in the economic facts and circumstances related to the invested asset, significant unforeseen changes in an individual subsidiary's liquidity needs, or changes in
tax laws or the regulatory environment.
fixed maturities and equity securities
an investment in a fixed maturity or equity security which is available for sale is impaired if its fair value falls below its cost or
new cost basis, and the decline is considered to be other-than-temporary. a fixed maturity security is other-than-temporarily impaired if it is probable
that the company will not be able to collect all amounts due under the security's contractual terms, the company does not have the intent to hold the security, or the company does not expect to
recover its cost over a forecasted recovery period. additionally, for certain securitized financial assets with contractual cash flows (including asset-backed securities), the company updates its
estimate of the present value of expected cash flows over the life of the security on a quarterly basis. if management determines that the fair value of the securitized financial asset and the present
value of the asset's cash flows estimated at the current financial reporting date are less than the present value of the estimated cash flows at the date of purchase (or previous financial reporting
date), then an other-than-temporary impairment is recognized and the securitized financial asset is written down to fair value. equity securities are
other-than-temporarily impaired when it becomes apparent that the company will not recover its cost over a forecasted recovery period.
for
securities expected to be sold, an other-than-temporary impairment charge is recognized if the company does not expect the fair value of a security to recover
prior to the expected date of sale. for public securities managed by external managers, the company cannot assert the intent and ability to hold the securities to recovery and therefore considers the
securities impaired when the fair value is below the cost basis at the end of the reporting period.
table of contents
real estate investments
on at least an annual basis, the company obtains independent appraisals for substantially all of its real estate investments. in
addition, the carrying value of a real estate property is reviewed for impairment on a quarterly basis or when events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be
recoverable. the review for impairment considers the valuation from the independent appraisal, when applicable, and incorporates an estimate of the undiscounted cash flows expected to result from the
use and eventual disposition of the real estate property. an impairment loss is recognized if the expected future undiscounted cash flows are less than the carrying value of the real estate property.
the impairment loss is measured as the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds fair value.
other investments
mortgage loans
a
mortgage loan is considered impaired when it is probable that the company will be unable to collect principal and interest amounts due. for mortgage loans
that are determined to be impaired, a reserve is established for the difference between the amortized cost and the fair market value of the underlying collateral. in estimating fair value, the company
uses interest rates reflecting the current real estate financing market returns. the company did not have any impaired mortgage loans at december31, 2008 and 2007.
venture capital investments and non-public common and preferred equity securities
externally
managed venture capital investments and non-public common and preferred equity securities are reviewed quarterly for
other-than-temporary impairment by the external fund manager and the company's portfolio managers. internally managed venture capital investments and non-public and
preferred equity securities are reviewed quarterly by the company's
portfolio managers. the company's portfolio managers and the external fund manager review and consider a variety of factors in determining the valuation of the investments and the potential for
other-than-temporary impairments. factors considered include the following:
the investee's most recent financing events;
an analysis of whether a fundamental deterioration or improvement has occurred;
whether the investee's progress has been substantially more or less than expected;
whether or not the valuations have improved or declined significantly in the investee's market sector;
whether or not the external fund manager and the company believe it is probable that the investee will need financing
within six months at a lower price than the company's carrying value; and
whether or not the company has the ability and intent to hold the investment for a period of time sufficient to allow for
recovery, enabling the company to receive value equal to or greater than its cost.
an
impairment loss is recognized if, based on the specific facts and circumstances, it is probable that the company will not be able to recover all of its cost of an individual holding.
the quarterly valuation procedures described above are in addition to the portfolio managers' ongoing responsibility to frequently monitor developments affecting those invested assets, paying
particular attention to events that might give rise to impairment write-downs.
table of contents
other investments excluding venture capital investments and non-public common and preferred equity securities
included
in other investments are private equity limited partnerships, investments in hedge funds and real estate partnerships that generally report
investments on their balance sheet at fair value and are accounted for by the company using the equity method of accounting. the company reviews these investments for impairment no less frequently
than quarterly and monitors the performance throughout the year through discussions with the managers/general partners. if the company becomes aware of an impairment of a partnership's investments at
the balance sheet date prior to receiving the partnership's financial statements, it will recognize an impairment by recording a reduction in the carrying value of the partnership with a corresponding
charge to net investment income.
goodwill and other intangible assets impairments
the company performs a review, on at least an annual basis, of goodwill held by the reporting units which are the company's three
operating and reportable segments: business insurance, financial, professional& international insurance, and personal insurance. the company estimates the fair value of its reporting units and
compares it to their carrying value, including goodwill. if the carrying values of the reporting units exceed their fair value, the amount of the impairment is calculated and goodwill is adjusted
accordingly.
in
2008, the company changed its methodology for estimating the fair value of its reporting units from a multiple of earnings model to a discounted cash flow model. this change was made
as a result of the effects of a severe disruption of the credit and equity markets and significant changes in the insurance industry that caused disparities between the multiple of earnings of the
company and the observed multiple of earnings of its competitors. the discounted cash flow model is an income approach to valuation that is based on a more detailed analysis for deriving a current
fair value of reporting units and is more representative of the company's current and expected future financial performance. the discounted cash flow model relies on the company's assumptions of its
future operating earnings, discounted utilizing an estimate of the company's cost of equity. other indefinite-lived intangible assets held by the company are also reviewed for impairment on at least
an annual basis. the classification of the asset as indefinite-lived is reassessed, and an impairment is recognized if the carrying amount of the asset exceeds its fair value.
intangible
assets that are deemed to have finite useful life are amortized over their useful lives. the carrying amount of intangible assets with a finite useful life is regularly
reviewed for indicators of impairment in value. impairment is recognized only if the carrying amount of the intangible asset is not recoverable from its undiscounted cash flows and is measured as the
difference between the carrying amount and the fair value of the asset.
the
company's review did not result in an impairment of its indefinite-lived or finite-lived intangible assets for the years ended december31, 2008, 2007 and 2006.
other uncertainties
for a discussion of other risks and uncertainties that could impact the company's results of operations or financial position, see
note15 of notes to the company's consolidated financial statements and "item1arisk factors."
future application of accounting standards
see note1 of notes to the company's consolidated financial statements for a discussion of recently issued accounting
pronouncements.
table of contents
the
company is currently required to prepare its financial statements in accordance with u.s. generally accepted accounting principles (gaap), as promulgated by the financial accounting
standards board (fasb). during 2008, the securities and exchange commission (sec) issued a proposed roadmap for comment for the potential use in filings with the sec of financial statements for u.s.
issuers prepared in accordance with international financial reporting standards (ifrs), as promulgated by the international accounting standards board (iasb), instead of in accordance with gaap. the
roadmap contains milestones that, if achieved, may lead the sec to decide in 2011 to require the use of ifrs for large accelerated filers, including the company, in 2014. the sec also is proposing to
permit u.s. companies to elect to file using ifrs, as adopted by the iasb, as early as
2010, if the company is in an industry group that reports using ifrs more commonly than any other set of standards, and if the company is one of the 20 largest companies in the industry worldwide
based on market capitalization. the iasb and the fasb are in the process of developing a global insurance standard that may involve methodologies for valuing insurance contract liabilities that may be
significantly different from the methodologies required by current gaap. the fasb and the iasb are also embarked on a long-term project to converge gaap and ifrs. the company is not able
to predict whether it will choose to, or be required to, adopt ifrs or how the adoption of ifrs (or the convergence of gaap and ifrs) may impact the company's financial statements in the future.
forward-looking statements
this report contains, and management may make, certain "forward-looking statements" within the meaning of the private securities
litigation reform act of 1995. all statements, other than statements of historical facts, may be forward-looking statements. specifically, earnings guidance, statements about the company's share
repurchase plans, statements about the potential impact of the recent disruption in the investment markets and other economic conditions on the company's investment portfolio and underwriting results
are forward looking, and the company may make forward-looking statements about its results of operations (including, among others, premium volume, net and operating income, investment income, return
on equity, expected current returns and combined ratio), and financial condition (including, among others, invested assets and liquidity); the sufficiency of the company's asbestos and other reserves
(including, among others, asbestos claim payment patterns); the cost and availability of reinsurance coverage; catastrophe losses; investment performance; investment, economic and underwriting market
conditions; and strategic initiatives. such statements are subject to risks and uncertainties, many of which are difficult to predict and generally beyond the company's control, that could cause
actual results to differ materially from those expressed in, or implied or projected by, the forward-looking information and statements.
for
a discussion of some of the factors that could cause actual results to differ, see "item1arisk factors". and
"item7management's discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of
operationscritical accounting estimates."
the
company's forward-looking statements speak only as of the date of this report or as of the date they are made, and the company undertakes no obligation to update its forward-looking
statements.
item7a.quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk
market risk
market risk is the risk of loss arising from adverse changes in market rates and prices, such as interest rates (inclusive of credit
spreads), foreign currency exchange rates and other relevant market rate or price changes. market risk is directly influenced by the volatility and liquidity in the markets in which the related
underlying assets are traded. the following is a discussion of the company's primary market risk exposures and how those exposures are managed as of december31, 2008. the company's
table of contents
market
risk sensitive instruments, including derivatives, are primarily entered into for purposes other than trading.
the
carrying value of the company's investment portfolio as of december31, 2008 and 2007 was $70.74billion and $74.82billion, respectively, of which 87% was
invested in fixed maturity securities at both dates. at december31, 2008 and 2007, approximately 5.5% and 6.5%, respectively, of the company's invested assets were denominated in foreign
currencies. the company's exposure to equity price risk is not significant. the company has no direct commodity risk and is not a party to any credit default swaps.
the
company's fixed maturity investment portfolio at december31, 2008 and 2007 included asset-backed securities collateralized by sub-prime mortgages and
collateralized mortgage obligations backed by alternative documentation mortgages with a collective market value of $206million and $286million, respectively (comprising approximately
0.3% and 0.4% of the company's total fixed maturity investments, respectively). the disruption in secondary investment markets for mortgage-backed securities provided the company with the opportunity
to selectively acquire additional asset-backed securities collateralized by sub-prime mortgages at discounted prices. the company purchased $47million and $89million of
such securities in 2008 and the fourth quarter of 2007, respectively. the company defines sub-prime mortgage-backed securities as investments in which the underlying loans primarily
exhibit one or more of the following characteristics: low fico scores, above-prime interest rates, high loan-to-value ratios or high debt-to-income
ratios. alternative documentation securitizations are
those in which the underlying loans primarily meet the government-sponsored entity's requirements for credit score but do not meet the government-sponsored entity's guidelines for documentation,
property type, debt and loan-to-value ratios. the average credit rating on these securities and obligations held by the company was "aa2" and "aaa" at december31, 2008
and 2007, respectively. approximately $81million of asset-backed securities collateralized by sub-prime and alternative documentation mortgages were downgraded in 2008.
the
company's fixed maturity investment portfolio at december31, 2008 included securities issued by numerous states, municipalities and political subdivisions (collectively
referred to as the municipal bond portfolio), a number of which were enhanced by third-party insurance for the payment of principal and interest in the event of an issuer default. the downgrade of
credit ratings of insurers of these securities has resulted in a corresponding downgrade in the ratings of the securities to the underlying rating of the respective security. of the insured municipal
bond portfolio, approximately 99% were rated at a3 or above, and approximately 81% were rated at aa3 or above, without the benefit of insurance. if economic conditions continue to deteriorate and
adversely impact the financial condition and/or revenues of states, municipalities and political subdivisions, the value of the company's holdings could be adversely impacted. however, the company
believes, based on current market conditions, that a further loss of the benefit of insurance would not result in a material adverse impact on the company's results of operations, financial position
or liquidity, due to the underlying credit strength of the issuers of the securities, as well as the company's ability and intent to hold the securities. the average credit rating of the underlying
issuers of these securities was "aa3" at december31, 2008. the average credit rating of the entire municipal bond portfolio was "aa1" at december31, 2008 with and without the
third-party insurance and includes pre-funded and escrowed to maturity securities, as well as securities issued without third-party insurance.
the
primary market risk to the investment portfolio is interest rate and credit risk associated with investments in fixed maturity securities. the portfolio duration relative to the
liabilities' duration is primarily managed through cash market transactions and treasury futures transactions.
the
company's tax-exempt fixed maturity investment portfolio totaled $38.79billion and $38.55billion at december31, 2008 and 2007, respectively.
federal and/or state tax legislation could be
table of contents
enacted
that would lessen or improve some or all of the tax advantages currently benefiting the company and result in an adverse or favorable impact on the value of these holdings.
the
primary market risk for all of the company's debt is interest rate risk at the time of refinancing. the company monitors the interest rate environment and evaluates refinancing
opportunities as maturity dates approach. for additional information regarding the company's debt see note8 of notes to the company's consolidated financial statements as well as the
"liquidity and capital resources" section of "item7management's discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations."
the
company's foreign exchange market risk exposure is concentrated in the company's invested assets and insurance reserves denominated in foreign currencies. cash flows from the
company's foreign operations are the primary source of funds for the purchase of investments denominated in foreign currencies. the company purchases these investments primarily to fund insurance
reserves and other liabilities denominated in the same currency, effectively reducing its foreign currency exchange rate exposure. invested assets denominated in the british pound sterling comprised
approximately 2.3% and 2.9% of the total invested assets at december31, 2008 and 2007, respectively. no other individual foreign currency accounted for more than 2.2% of the company's invested
assets at december31, 2008 or 2007.
there
were no other significant changes in the company's primary market risk exposures or in how those exposures were managed for the year ended december31, 2008 compared to the
year ended december31, 2007. the company does not currently anticipate significant changes in its primary market risk exposures or in how those exposures are managed in future reporting
periods based upon what is known or expected to be in effect in future reporting periods.
sensitivity analysis
sensitivity analysis is defined as the measurement of potential loss in future earnings, fair values or cash flows of market sensitive
instruments resulting from one or more selected hypothetical changes in interest rates and other market rates or prices over a selected period of time. in the company's sensitivity analysis model, a
hypothetical change in market rates is selected that is expected to reflect reasonably possible near-term changes in those rates. "near-term" means a period of time going
forward up to one year from the date of the consolidated financial statements. actual results may differ from the hypothetical change in market rates assumed in this disclosure, especially since this
sensitivity analysis does not reflect the results of any actions that would be taken by the company to mitigate such hypothetical losses in fair value.
interest rate risk
in this sensitivity analysis model, the company uses fair values to measure its potential loss. the sensitivity analysis model includes
the following financial instruments entered into for purposes other than trading: fixed maturities, non-redeemable preferred stocks, mortgage loans, short-term securities, debt
and derivative financial instruments. the primary market risk to the company's market sensitive instruments is interest rate risk (inclusive of credit spreads). the sensitivity analysis model uses a
100 basis point change in interest rates to measure the hypothetical change in fair value of financial instruments included in the model.
for
invested assets with primary exposure to interest rate risk, estimates of portfolio duration and convexity are used to model the loss of fair value that would be expected to result
from a parallel increase in interest rates. durations on invested assets are adjusted for call, put and interest rate reset features. durations on tax-exempt securities are adjusted for
the fact that the yields on such securities do not normally move in lockstep with changes in the u.s. treasury curve. fixed maturity portfolio
table of contents
durations
are calculated on a market value weighted basis, including accrued interest, using holdings as of december31, 2008 and 2007.
for
debt, the change in fair value is determined by calculating hypothetical december31, 2008 and 2007 ending prices based on yields adjusted to reflect a 100 basis point change,
comparing such hypothetical ending prices to actual ending prices, and multiplying the difference by the par or securities outstanding.
the
sensitivity analysis model used by the company produces a loss in fair value of market sensitive instruments of approximately $2.5billion based on a 100 basis point increase
in interest rates as of both december31, 2008 and 2007.
the
loss estimates do not take into account the impact of possible interventions that the company might reasonably undertake in order to mitigate or avoid losses that would result from
emerging interest rate trends. in addition, the loss value only reflects the impact of an interest rate increase on the fair value of the company's financial instruments. as a result, the loss value
excludes a significant portion of the company's consolidated balance sheet, primarily claims and claim adjustment expense reserves, which if included in the sensitivity analysis model, would mitigate
the impact of the loss in fair value associated with a 100 basis point increase in interest rates.
foreign currency exchange rate risk
the company uses fair values of investment securities to measure its potential loss from foreign denominated investments. a
hypothetical 10% reduction in value of foreign denominated investments is used to estimate the impact on the market value of the foreign denominated holdings. the potential loss is reduced by foreign
currency forward transactions that are used to hedge a portion of the company's exposure to foreign currencies. the company's analysis indicates that a hypothetical 10% reduction in the value of
foreign denominated investments would be expected to produce a loss in fair value of approximately $386million and $485million at december31, 2008 and 2007, respectively.
table of contents
item 8.financial statements and supplementary data
index to consolidated financial statements
page
report of independent registered public accounting firm
consolidated statement of income for the years ended december31, 2008,
2007 and 2006
consolidated balance sheet at december31, 2008 and 2007
consolidated statement of changes in shareholders'
equity for the years ended december31, 2008, 2007 and 2006
consolidated statement of cash flows for the years ended december31,
2008, 2007 and 2006
notes to consolidated financial statements
table of contents
report of independent registered public accounting firm
the
board of directors and stockholders
the travelers companies,inc.:
we
have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheet of the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries as of december31, 2008 and 2007, and the related consolidated
statements of income, changes in shareholders' equity, and cash flows for each of the years in the three-year period ended december31, 2008. these consolidated financial statements
are the responsibility of the company's management. our responsibility is to express an opinion on these consolidated financial statements based on our audits.
we
conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the public company accounting oversight board (united states). those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material misstatement. an audit includes examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in
the financial statements. an audit also includes assessing the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall financial statement
presentation. we believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
in
our opinion, the consolidated financial statements referred to above present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of the travelers companies,inc. and
subsidiaries as of december31, 2008 and 2007, and the results of their operations and their cash flows for each of the years in the three-year period ended december31,
2008, in conformity with u.s. generally accepted accounting principles.
we
also have audited, in accordance with the standards of the public company accounting oversight board (united states), the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries internal
control over financial reporting as of december31, 2008, based on criteria established in internal controlintegrated framework issued by the committee of sponsoring organizations
of the treadway commission (coso), and our report dated february19, 2009 expressed an unqualified opinion on the effectiveness of the company's internal control over financial reporting.
/s/kpmgllp
kpmgllp
minneapolis,
minnesota
february19, 2009
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries         consolidated statement of income         (in millions, except per share data)
for the year ended december31,
revenues
premiums
$
21,579
$
21,470
$
20,760
net investment income
2,792
3,761
3,517
fee income
net realized investment gains (losses)
(415
)
other revenues
total revenues
24,477
26,017
25,090
claims and expenses
claims and claim adjustment expenses
12,993
12,397
12,244
amortization of deferred acquisition costs
3,880
3,706
3,339
general and administrative expenses
3,518
3,352
3,458
interest expense
total claims and expenses
20,761
19,801
19,365
income before income taxes
3,716
6,216
5,725
income tax expense
1,615
1,517
net income
$
2,924
$
4,601
$
4,208
net income per share
basic
$
4.90
$
7.04
$
6.12
diluted
$
4.82
$
6.86
$
5.91
weighted average number of common shares outstanding
basic
596.4
652.7
687.1
diluted
607.3
672.3
716.7
see
notes to consolidated financial statements.
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries         consolidated balance sheet         (in millions)
at december31,
assets
fixed maturities, available for sale at fair value (including $8 and $1,988 subject to securities lending) (amortized cost $61,569 and $64,152)
$
61,275
$
64,920
equity securities, at fair value (cost $461 and $473)
real estate
short-term securities
5,222
5,186
other investments
3,035
3,374
total investments
70,738
74,818
cash
investment income accrued
premiums receivable
5,954
6,142
reinsurance recoverables
14,232
15,641
ceded unearned premiums
1,123
deferred acquisition costs
1,774
1,809
deferred tax asset
1,965
1,207
contractholder receivables
6,350
6,696
goodwill
3,366
3,366
other intangible assets
other assets
2,570
2,476
total assets
$
109,751
$
115,224
liabilities
claims and claim adjustment expense reserves
$
54,723
$
57,700
unearned premium reserves
10,957
11,227
contractholder payables
6,350
6,696
payables for reinsurance premiums
debt
6,181
6,242
other liabilities
5,693
6,125
total liabilities
84,432
88,608
shareholders' equity
preferred stock savings planconvertible preferred stock (0.3 shares issued and outstanding at both dates)
common stock (1,750.0 shares authorized; 585.1 and 627.8 shares issued and outstanding)
19,242
18,990
retained earnings
13,314
11,110
accumulated other changes in equity from nonowner sources
(900
)
treasury stock, at cost (128.8 and 82.9 shares)
(6,426
)
(4,266
)
total shareholders' equity
25,319
26,616
total liabilities and shareholders' equity
$
109,751
$
115,224
see
notes to consolidated financial statements.
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries         consolidated statement of changes in shareholders' equity         (in millions)
for the year ended december31,
convertible preferred stocksavings plan
balance, beginning of year
$
$
$
redemptions during year
(23
)
(17
)
(24
)
balance, end of year
common stock
balance, beginning of year
18,990
18,530
18,096
employee share-based compensation
compensation amortization under share-based plans and other changes
conversion of convertible notes
balance, end of year
19,242
18,990
18,530
retained earnings
balance, beginning of year
11,110
7,253
3,750
net income
2,924
4,601
4,208
dividends
(715
)
(742
)
(701
)
other
(5
)
(2
)
(4
)
balance, end of year
13,314
11,110
7,253
accumulated other changes in equity from nonowner sources, net of tax
balance, beginning of year
change in net unrealized gain on investment securities
(764
)
net change in benefit plan assets and obligations recognized in equity
(405
)
(50
)
(80
)
net change in unrealized foreign currency translation and other changes
(401
)
balance, end of year
(900
)
treasury stock (at cost)
balance, beginning of year
(4,266
)
(1,229
)
(47
)
treasury shares acquiredshare repurchase authorization
(2,122
)
(2,947
)
(1,121
)
net shares acquired related to employee share-based compensation plans
(38
)
(90
)
(61
)
balance, end of year
(6,426
)
(4,266
)
(1,229
)
total common shareholders' equity
25,230
26,504
25,006
total shareholders' equity
$
25,319
$
26,616
$
25,135
common shares outstanding
balance, beginning of year
627.8
678.3
693.4
shares acquiredshare repurchase authorization
(45.0
)
(56.0
)
(22.8
)
net shares issued under employee share-based compensation plans
2.3
4.8
7.7
shares issued pursuant to conversion of convertible notes
0.7
balance, end of year
585.1
627.8
678.3
summary of changes in equity from nonowner sources
net income
$
2,924
$
4,601
$
4,208
other changes in equity from nonowner sources, net of tax
(1,570
)
total changes in equity from nonowner sources
$
1,354
$
4,819
$
4,389
see notes to consolidated financial statements.
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries         consolidated statement of cash flows         (in millions)
for the year ended december31,
cash flows from operating activities
net income
$
2,924
$
4,601
$
4,208
adjustments to reconcile net income to net cash provided by operating activities:
net realized investment (gains) losses
(154
)
(11
)
depreciation and amortization
deferred federal income tax expense (benefit)
(58
)
amortization of deferred acquisition costs
3,880
3,706
3,339
equity in (income) loss from other investments
(570
)
(478
)
premiums receivable
(4
)
(57
)
reinsurance recoverables
1,209
2,172
1,998
deferred acquisition costs
(3,845
)
(3,925
)
(3,427
)
claims and claim adjustment expense reserves
(2,033
)
(1,410
)
(2,565
)
unearned premium reserves
(270
)
trading account activities
(3
)
loss (gain) on redemption of subordinated debentures
(42
)
excess tax benefits from share-based payment arrangements
(10
)
(25
)
(16
)
other
(384
)
(278
)
net cash provided by operating activities
3,138
5,286
4,774
cash flows from investing activities
proceeds from maturities of fixed maturities
4,869
5,305
5,810
proceeds from sales of investments:
fixed maturities
6,932
7,323
4,401
equity securities
real estate
other investments
1,460
1,111
purchases of investments:
fixed maturities
(11,127
)
(14,719
)
(13,845
)
equity securities
(95
)
(135
)
(83
)
real estate
(38
)
(74
)
(75
)
other investments
(667
)
(740
)
(705
)
net (purchases) sales of short-term securities
(406
)
(562
)
(85
)
securities transactions in course of settlement
(318
)
(123
)
other
(45
)
(378
)
(325
)
net cash used in investing activities
(162
)
(2,526
)
(3,064
)
cash flows from financing activities
issuance of debt
2,461
payment of debt
(552
)
(1,956
)
(806
)
dividends paid to shareholders
(715
)
(742
)
(702
)
issuance of common stockemployee share options
treasury stock acquiredshare repurchase authorization
(2,167
)
(2,920
)
(1,103
)
treasury stock acquirednet employee share-based compensation
(29
)
(39
)
(17
)
excess tax benefits from share-based payment arrangements
other
net cash used in financing activities
(2,868
)
(2,953
)
(1,593
)
effect of exchange rate changes on cash
(29
)
net increase (decrease) in cash
(188
)
cash at beginning of period
cash at end of period
$
$
$
supplemental disclosure of cash flow information
income taxes paid
$
$
1,346
$
interest paid
$
$
$
see notes to consolidated financial statements.
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries         notes to consolidated financial statements
1. summary of significant accounting policies
basis of presentation
the consolidated financial statements include the accounts of the travelers companies,inc. (together with its subsidiaries, the
company). the preparation of the consolidated financial statements in conformity with u.s. generally accepted accounting principles (gaap) requires management to make estimates and assumptions that
affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and
claims and expenses during the reporting period. actual results could differ from those estimates. certain reclassifications have been made to the 2007 and 2006 financial statements to conform to the
2008 presentation. all material intercompany transactions and balances have been eliminated.
adoption of new accounting standards
fair value measurements
in september 2006, the fasb issued statement of financial accounting standards no.157, fair value
measurements (fas157). fas157 defines fair value, establishes a framework for measuring fair value and expands disclosure about fair value measurements. it
applies to other pronouncements that require or permit fair value but does not require any new fair value measurements. the statement defines fair value as "the price that would be received to sell an
asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date."
fas157
establishes a fair value hierarchy to increase consistency and comparability in fair value measurements and disclosures. the hierarchy is based on the inputs used in
valuation and gives the highest priority to quoted prices in active markets. the highest possible level should be used to measure fair value. fas157 is effective for fiscal years beginning
after november15, 2007.
in
february 2008, the fasb issued fasb staff position (fsp) fas157-2, effective date of fasb statement no.157
(fsp fas157-2), which permits a one-year deferral of the application of fasb statement no.157, fair value
measurements, for all non-financial assets and non-financial liabilities, except those that are recognized or disclosed at fair value in the financial
statements on a recurring basis (at least annually).
the
company adopted fas157 and fsp fas157-2 effective january1, 2008, and elected not to apply the provisions of fas157 to goodwill and other
intangible assets held by the company and measured annually for impairment testing purposes only. the adoption of fas157 and fsp fas157-2 did not have a material effect on
the company's results of operations, financial position or liquidity. the company will adopt fas157 for non-financial assets and non-financial liabilities on
january1, 2009 and does not expect the provisions to have a material effect on its results of operations, financial position or liquidity.
in
october 2008, the fasb issued fsp fas157-3, determining the fair value of a financial asset when the market for that asset is not
active (fsp fas157-3), with an immediate effective date, including prior periods for which financial statements have not been issued. fsp
fas157-3 amends fas157 to clarify the application of fair value in inactive markets and allows for the use of management's internal assumptions about future cash flows with
appropriately risk-adjusted discount rates when relevant observable market data does not exist. the objective of fas157 has not changed and continues to be the determination of the
price that would be received in an orderly transaction
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
1. summary of significant accounting policies (continued)
that
is not a forced liquidation or distressed sale at the measurement date. the adoption of fsp fas157-3 in the third quarter did not have a material effect on the company's
results of operations, financial position or liquidity.
impairment of structured securities
in january 2009, the fasb issued fasb staff position (fsp) eitf99-20-1,  amendments to the impairment guidance of eitf issue no.99-20 (fsp eitf99-20-1), which is effective
for interim and annual periods ending after december15, 2008. fsp eitf99-20-1 amends eitf99-20, recognition of
interest income and impairment on purchased beneficial interests and beneficial interests that continue to be held by a transferor in securitized financial assets
(eitf99-20), to align the impairment guidance in eitf99-20 with the impairment guidance in fas115, accounting for certain
investments in debt and equity securities. fsp eitf99-20-1 amends the cash flows model used to analyze an
other-than-temporary impairment under eitf99-20 by replacing the market participant view with management's assumption of whether it is probable that there
is an adverse change in the estimated cash flows. the adoption of fsp eitf99-20-1 in the fourth quarter did not have a material effect on the company's results of
operations, financial position or liquidity.
fair value option for financial assets and financial liabilities
in february 2007, the fasb issued statement of financial accounting standards no.159, the fair value
option for financial assets and financial liabilitiesincluding an amendment of fasb statement no.115
(fas159). fas159 permits an entity to irrevocably elect fair value on a contract-by-contract basis for new assets or liabilities within the scope of
fas159 as the initial and subsequent measurement attribute for those financial assets and liabilities and certain other items including property and casualty
insurance contracts. entities electing the fair value option would be required to recognize changes in fair value in earnings and to expense up-front costs and fees associated with the
item for which the fair value option is elected. entities electing the fair value option are required to distinguish on the face of the statement of financial position the fair value of assets and
liabilities for which the fair value option has been elected, and similar assets and liabilities measured using another measurement attribute. an entity can accomplish this by either reporting the
fair value and non-fair-value carrying amounts as separate line items or aggregating those amounts and disclosing parenthetically the amount of fair value included in the
aggregate amount.
fas159
was effective for fiscal years beginning after november15, 2007. upon adoption, an entity is permitted to elect the fair value option irrevocably for any existing
asset or liability within the scope of the standard. the adjustment to reflect the difference between the fair value and the carrying amount would be accounted for as a cumulative-effect adjustment to
retained earnings as of the date of initial adoption. retrospective application would not be permitted. the company did not elect the fair value option for any of the assets and liabilities currently
held upon its adoption of fas159 effective january1, 2008. therefore, fas159 did not have an impact on the company's results of operations, financial position or liquidity at
adoption.
collateral assignment split-dollar life insurance arrangements
in march 2007, the fasb issued emerging issues task force issue no.06-10, accounting for
deferred compensation and postretirement benefit aspects of collateral assignment split-dollar life
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
1. summary of significant accounting policies (continued)
insurance arrangements (eitf06-10). eitf06-10 provides guidance on the recognition and measurement of assets related to collateral
assignment split-dollar life insurance arrangements. eitf06-10 is effective for fiscal years beginning after december15, 2007. the adoption of eitf06-10
effective january1, 2008 did not have a material effect on the company's results of operations, financial position or liquidity.
accounting for income tax benefits of dividends on share-based payment awards
in june 2007, the fasb issued emerging issues task force issue no.06-11, accounting for
income tax benefits of dividends on share-based payment
awards (eitf06-11). eitf06-11 requires that realized income tax benefits related to dividend payments that are charged to retained
earnings and paid to employees holding equity shares, nonvested equity share units and outstanding equity share options should be recognized as an increase in additional paid-in capital.
eitf06-11 applies to share-based payment awards that are declared in fiscal years beginning after december15, 2007. the adoption of eitf06-11 at
january1, 2008 did not have a material effect on the company's results of operations, financial position or liquidity.
employers' accounting for defined benefit pension and other postretirement plans, an amendment of fasb statements no.87, 88, 106 and 132(r)
in september 2006, the fasb issued statement of financial accounting standards no.158, employers'
accounting for defined benefit pension and other postretirement plans, an amendment of fasb statements no.87, 88, 106 and 132(r) (fas158). fas158
requires an employer to recognize the funded status of a benefit plan as an asset or liability in its statement of financial position, measured as the difference between plan assets at fair value and
the benefit obligation, and to recognize as a component of accumulated other changes in equity from nonowner sources, net of tax, actuarial gains or losses and prior service costs or credits that
arise during the period but which are not recognized as components of net periodic benefit cost pursuant to fasb statement no.87, employers' accounting for
pensions (fas87), or fasb statement no.106, employers' accounting for postretirement benefits other than
pensions (fas106). the provisions of fas87 and fas106 continue to apply in measuring plan assets and benefit obligations, as of the date of the fiscal
year-end statement of financial position, and in determining the amount of net periodic benefit cost. the provisions of fas158 were effective for fiscal years ending after
december15, 2006 and did not allow retrospective application. the company's adoption of fas158 effective december31, 2006 resulted in an $80million reduction, net of
tax, to shareholders' equity in 2006 and was recognized as an adjustment to the ending balance of accumulated other changes in equity from nonowner sources. the adoption of fas158 did not
affect the company's results of operations or liquidity as fas158 does not affect the determination of net periodic pension cost. see note13.
accounting standards not yet adopted
derivative instruments and hedging activities
in march 2008, the fasb issued statement of financial accounting standards no.161, disclosures about
derivative instruments and hedging activities, an amendment of fasb statement no.133 (fas161). fas161 changes the disclosure requirements for derivative
instruments and hedging activities and specifically requires qualitative disclosures about objectives and strategies for using
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
1. summary of significant accounting policies (continued)
derivatives,
quantitative disclosures about fair value amounts of, and gains and losses on, derivative instruments, and disclosures about credit-risk-related contingent
features in derivative agreements. the provisions of fas161 are effective for financial statements issued for fiscal years beginning after november15, 2008.
determination of the useful life of intangible assets
in april 2008, the fasb issued fasb staff position (fsp) fas142-3, determination of the
useful life of intangible assets. the fsp amends the factors that an entity should consider in determining the useful life of a recognized intangible asset under
fas142, goodwill and other intangible assets, to include the entity's historical experience in renewing or extending similar arrangements,
whether or not the arrangements have explicit renewal or extension provisions. previously, an entity was precluded from using its own assumptions about renewal or extension of an arrangement where
there was likely to be substantial cost or modifications. entities without their own historical experience should consider the assumptions market participants would use about renewal or extension. the
amendment may result in the useful life of an entity's intangible asset differing from the period of expected cash flows that was used to measure the fair value of the underlying asset using the
market participant's perceived value. the fsp also requires disclosure to provide information on an entity's intent and/or ability to renew or extend the arrangement.
the
fsp is effective for financial statements issued for fiscal years beginning after december15, 2008, and for interim periods within those fiscal years. early adoption is
prohibited. the requirements for determining the useful life of intangible assets apply to intangible assets acquired after january1, 2009. the disclosure requirements will be applied
prospectively to all intangible assets recognized as of, and subsequent to, the effective date.
participating securities granted in share-based payment transactions
in june 2008, the fasb issued fasb staff position (fsp) eitf03-6-1, determining
whether instruments granted in share-based payment transactions are participating securities. this fsp addresses whether instruments granted in share-based payment transactions
are participating securities prior to vesting and, therefore, should be included in the earnings allocation in computing earnings per share (eps) under the two-class method described in
fas128, earnings per share. the fsp redefines participating securities to include unvested share-based payment awards that contain
non-forfeitable dividends or dividend equivalents as participating securities to be included in the computation of eps pursuant to the "two-class method." outstanding unvested
restricted stock and deferred stock units issued under employee compensation programs containing such dividend participation features would be considered participating securities subject to the
"two-class method" in computing eps rather than the "treasury stock method."
the
fsp is effective for financial statements issued for fiscal years beginning after december15, 2008 and for interim periods within those years. early application was not
permitted. the company has estimated that the application of the fsp computational guidance will reduce previously reported basic eps for the years ended december31, 2008 and 2007 by $0.03 per
share and $0.04 per share, respectively, and reduce previously reported diluted eps by $0.01 per share for each of the years ended december31, 2008 and 2007. in accordance with provisions of
the fsp, upon adoption in 2009, all
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
1. summary of significant accounting policies (continued)
prior-period
basic and diluted eps data presented will be restated to reflect the retrospective application of the fsp computational guidance.
business combinations
in december 2007, the fasb issued revised statement of financial accounting standards no.141r, business
combinations (fas141r), a replacement of fas141, business combinations. fas141r provides revised
guidance on how an acquirer recognizes and measures in its financial statements the identifiable assets acquired, the liabilities assumed and any noncontrolling interest in the acquiree. in addition,
it provides revised guidance on the recognition and measurement of goodwill acquired in the business combination.
fas141r
also provides guidance specific to the recognition, classification, and measurement of assets and liabilities related to insurance and reinsurance contracts acquired in a
business combination.
fas141r
applies to business combinations for acquisitions occurring on or after january1, 2009. accordingly, fas141r does not impact the company's previous
transactions involving purchase accounting.
noncontrolling interests in consolidated financial statements
in december 2007, the fasb issued statement of financial accounting standards no.160, noncontrolling
interests in consolidated financial statementsan amendment of accounting research bulletin no.51
(fas160). fas160 amends accounting research bulletin no.51 to establish accounting and reporting standards for the noncontrolling interest in a subsidiary and for the
deconsolidation of a subsidiary. in addition, it clarifies that a noncontrolling interest in a subsidiary is an ownership interest in the consolidated entity that should be reported as a component of
equity in the consolidated financial statements.
fas160
is effective on a prospective basis beginning january1, 2009, except for the presentation and disclosure requirements which are applied on a retrospective basis
for all periods presented. the company does not expect the provisions of fas160 to have a material effect on its results of operations, financial position or liquidity.
employers' disclosures about postretirement benefit plan assets
in december 2008, the fasb issued fasb staff position (fsp) fas132(r)-1, employers'
disclosures about postretirement benefit plan assets. the fsp requires an employer to provide certain disclosures about plan assets of its defined benefit pension or other
postretirement plans. the disclosures required include the investment policies and strategies of the plans, the fair value of the major categories of plan assets, the inputs and valuation techniques
used to develop fair value measurements and a description of significant concentrations of risk in plan assets. the fsp is effective for fiscal years ending after december15, 2009.
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
1. summary of significant accounting policies (continued)
accounting policies
investments
fixed maturity and equity securities
fixed maturities include bonds, notes and redeemable preferred stocks. fixed maturities, including instruments subject to securities
lending agreements, are classified as available for sale and are reported at fair value, with unrealized investment gains and losses, net of income taxes, credited or charged directly to accumulated
other changes in equity from nonowner sources. equity securities, which include public common and non-redeemable preferred stocks, are classified as available for sale with changes in fair
value, net of income tax, charged or credited directly to accumulated other changes in equity from nonowner sources.
real estate
the company's real estate investments include warehouses, office buildings and other commercial land and properties that are directly
owned. real estate is recorded on the purchase date at the purchase price, which generally represents fair value, and is supported by internal analysis or external appraisals, using discounted cash
flow analyses and other acceptable valuation techniques. real estate held for investment purposes is subsequently carried at cost less accumulated depreciation. buildings are depreciated on a
straight-line basis over the shorter of the expected useful life of the building or 39years. accumulated depreciation on real estate held for investment purposes was
$140million and $111million at december31, 2008 and 2007, respectively. real estate held for sale is carried at lower of cost or fair value, less estimated cost to sell.
short-term securities
short-term securities are carried at amortized cost. the company's short-term investments consist mainly of
high-quality commercial paper (primarily a1/p1) with an average of 39days to maturity at december31, 2008. additionally, it is the company's policy to not invest in
structured products for its short-term investments. the company believes that there is insignificant credit risk in its short-term portfolio and that amortized cost
approximates fair value. the company includes short-term investments in its impairment monitoring to identify any credit issues.
other investments
venture capital investments and non-public common and preferred equity securities
the
company holds venture capital investments and investments in non-public common and preferred stocks that are classified as "available for
sale," with changes in fair value, net of income tax, charged or credited directly to accumulated other changes in equity from nonowner sources. the fair value estimate is determined either internally
or by an external fund manager based on recent filings, operating results, balance sheet stability, growth, and other business and market sector fundamentals. the company's venture capital investments
are generally non-publicly traded instruments in early-stage companies and historically have a holding period of four to seven years. these investments are primarily in the health care,
software and computer services, and networking and information technologies infrastructures industries. the underlying investments of these venture capital investments are reported at fair value. the
fair value of the venture capital investments is based on an estimate
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
1. summary of significant accounting policies (continued)
determined
by the external fund manager and reviewed by the company for investments in which there is no public market.
in
may 2007, the company completed the bundled sale of a substantial portion of its venture capital portfolio. prior to the sale, these venture capital investments were consolidated in
the company's financial statements. as a result of the sale, the company did not have any venture capital investments that were consolidated at december31, 2008 and 2007.
other
other
investments include private equity limited partnerships, hedge funds, real estate partnerships, joint ventures, non-public common and
preferred equities, mortgage loans and trading securities. the company uses the equity method of accounting for private equity limited partnerships, real estate partnerships, hedge funds and joint
ventures. the partnerships and hedge funds generally report investments on their balance sheet at fair value. the financial statements prepared by the investee are received by the company on a lag
basis, with the lag period generally dependent upon the type of underlying investments. the private equity partnerships and real estate partnerships provide financial information quarterly which is
generally available to investors, including the company, within three to six months following the date of the reporting period. the hedge funds provide financial information monthly which is available
to investors within one month following the date of the reporting period. the company regularly requests financial information from the partnerships prior to the receipt of the partnerships' financial
statements, and records any material information obtained from these requests in the financial statements. mortgage loans are carried at amortized cost. trading securities are marked to market with
the change in fair value recognized in net investment income during the current period.
derivative financial instruments
the company may use derivative financial instruments, including interest rate swaps, foreign currency forward contracts, equity swaps,
credit derivatives, options, forward contracts and financial futures, as a means of hedging exposure to interest rate, equity price change and foreign currency risk. during 2008 and 2007, the company
used u.s. treasury note futures to modify the duration of specific assets within the investment portfolio and a foreign currency forward contract to hedge foreign currency exposure of an investment in
a foreign operation. the company also held non-public stock purchase warrants of a publicly-held company which are reported in other investments. for a further discussion of
the derivatives used by the company, see note3.
the
company's insurance subsidiaries do not hold or issue derivative instruments for trading purposes. the company recognizes all derivatives, including certain derivative instruments
embedded in other contracts, as either assets or liabilities in the consolidated balance sheet and measures those instruments at fair value. where applicable, hedge accounting is used to account for
derivatives. for an instrument to qualify as a hedge, the hedge relationship must be designated and formally documented at inception, detailing the particular risk management objective and strategy
for the hedge, including the item and risk that are being hedged, the derivative that is being used, and how effectiveness is being assessed. a derivative must be highly effective in accomplishing the
objective of offsetting either changes in fair value or cash flows for the risk being hedged. the effectiveness of these hedging relationships is evaluated on a retrospective and prospective basis
using quantitative measures of
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
1. summary of significant accounting policies (continued)
correlation.
if a hedge relationship is found to be ineffective, it no longer qualifies as a hedge, and any excess gains or losses attributable to such ineffectiveness as well as subsequent changes in
fair value are recognized in net realized investment gains (losses). the recognition of gains or losses on derivative instruments that have been designated and qualify as a hedge depends upon whether
the derivative instrument is a fair value hedge, a cash flow hedge or a foreign currency hedge.
derivatives
that do not qualify for hedge accounting are carried at fair value with the changes in fair value reflected in the consolidated statement of income in net realized investment
gains (losses).
net investment income
investment income from fixed maturities and mortgage loans is recognized based on the constant effective yield method which includes an
adjustment for estimated principal repayments, if any. the effective yield used to determine amortization for fixed maturities subject to prepayment risk (e.g.,asset-backed,
loan-backed and structured securities) is recalculated and adjusted periodically based upon actual historical and/or projected future cash flows, which are obtained from a widely-accepted
securities data provider. the adjustments to the yield for highly rated prepayable fixed maturities are accounted for using the retrospective method. the adjustments to the yield for
non-highly rated prepayable fixed maturities are accounted for using the prospective method. dividends on equity securities (public and non-public) and venture capital
investments are recognized in income when declared. rental income on real estate is recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease term.
see
note3 for further discussion. investments in private equity limited partnerships, real estate partnerships, hedge funds and joint ventures are accounted for using the equity
method of accounting, whereby the company's share of the investee's earnings or losses in the fund are reported in net investment income. trading securities are marked to market with the change in
fair value recognized in net investment income during the current period.
accrual
of income is suspended on non-securitized fixed maturities or mortgage loans that are in default, or on which it is likely that future payments will not be made as
scheduled. interest income on investments in default is recognized only when payments are received. investments included in the consolidated balance sheet that were not income-producing for the
preceding 12months were not material.
for
fixed maturities where the company records an other-than-temporary impairment, a determination is made as to the cause of the impairment and whether the
company expects a recovery in the value. for fixed maturities where the company expects a recovery in value, not necessarily to par, the constant effective yield method, as discussed above, is
utilized and the investment is amortized to the expected recovery amount.
investment gains and losses
net realized investment gains and losses are included as a component of pretax revenues based upon specific identification of the
investments sold on the trade date. included in net realized investment gains (losses) are other-than-temporary impairment losses on invested assets other than those
investments accounted for using the equity method of accounting as described in the "investment impairments" section that follows.
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
1. summary of significant accounting policies (continued)
investment impairments
the company recognizes an impairment loss when an invested asset's value declines below cost, adjusted for accretion, amortization and
previous other-than-temporary impairments (new cost basis), and it is determined that the decline is other-than-temporary. some of the factors
considered in evaluating whether a decline in fair value is other-than-temporary include: (1)the company's ability and intent to retain the investment for a period of
time sufficient to allow for an anticipated recovery in value; (2)the recoverability of principal and interest for fixed maturity securities, or cost for equity securities; (3)the
length of time and extent to which the fair value has been less than amortized cost for fixed maturity securities, or cost for equity securities; and (4)the financial condition,
near-term and long-term prospects for the issuer, including the relevant industry conditions and trends, and implications of rating agency actions and offering prices. when the
company determines that an invested asset is other-than-temporarily impaired, the invested asset is written down to fair value, and the amount of the impairment is included in
earnings as a realized investment loss. the fair value then becomes the new cost basis of the investment, and any subsequent recoveries in fair value, other than amounts accreted to the expected
recovery amount, are recognized at disposition. due to the subjective nature of the company's analysis and estimates of fair value along with the judgment that must be applied in the analysis, it is
possible that the company could reach a different conclusion whether or not to impair a security if it had access to additional information about the investee. additionally, it is possible that the
investee's ability to meet future contractual obligations may be different than what the company determined during its analysis, which may lead to a different impairment conclusion in future periods.
the
company recognizes a realized loss when impairment is deemed to be other-than-temporary even if a decision to sell an invested asset has not been made. when
the company has decided to sell a temporarily impaired available-for-sale invested asset and the company does not expect the fair value of the invested asset to fully recover
prior to the expected time of sale, the invested asset is deemed to be other-than-temporarily impaired in the period in which the decision to sell is made.
the
company's process for identifying and reviewing invested assets for impairments during any quarter includes the following:
identification and evaluation of investments that have possible indications of
other-than-temporary impairment, which includes an analysis of all investments with gross unrealized investment losses that have fair values less than 80% of cost;
review and evaluation of external and internal portfolio managers' recommendations for
other-than-temporary impairments of any other investments based on the investee's current financial condition, liquidity, near-term recovery prospects, the outlook
for the business sectors in which the investee operates and other factors (in addition to reviewing investments with an estimated fair value of less than 80% of cost);
consideration of evidential matter, including an evaluation of factors or triggers that may or may not cause individual
investments to qualify as having other-than-temporary impairments; and
determination of the status of each analyzed investment as other-than-temporary or not, with
documentation of the rationale for the decision.
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
1. summary of significant accounting policies (continued)
sales of temporarily impaired invested assets
the company may, from time to time, sell invested assets subsequent to the balance sheet date that were considered temporarily impaired
at the balance sheet date. such sales are generally due to events occurring subsequent to the balance sheet date that result in a change in the company's intent or ability to hold an invested asset.
the types of events that may result in a sale include significant changes in the economic facts and circumstances related to the invested asset, significant unforeseen changes in an individual
subsidiary's liquidity needs, or changes in tax laws or the regulatory environment.
fixed maturities and equity securities
an investment in a fixed maturity or equity security which is available for sale is impaired if its fair value falls below its cost or
new cost basis, and the decline is considered to be other-than-temporary. a fixed maturity security is other-than-temporarily impaired if it is probable
that the company will not be able to collect all amounts due under the security's contractual terms, the company does not have the intent to hold the security, or the company does not expect to
recover its cost over a forecasted recovery period. additionally, for certain securitized financial assets with contractual cash flows (including asset-backed securities), the company updates its best
estimate of the present value of expected cash flows over the life of the security on a quarterly basis. if management determines that the fair value of the securitized financial asset and the present
value of the asset's cash flows estimated at the current financial reporting date are less than the present value of the estimated cash flows at the date of purchase (or previous financial reporting
date), then an other-than-temporary impairment is recognized and the securitized financial asset is written down to fair value. for fixed maturity investments where fair value
is less than the carrying value and the company did not reach a decision to impair, the company continues to have the intent and ability to hold such investments to a projected recovery in value,
which may not be until maturity. equity securities are other-than-temporarily impaired when it becomes apparent that the company will not recover its cost over a forecasted
recovery period.
for
securities expected to be sold, an other-than-temporary impairment charge is recognized if the company does not expect the fair value of a security to recover
prior to the expected date of sale. further, for public securities managed by external managers, the company cannot assert the intent and ability to hold the security to recovery and, therefore,
considers the securities impaired when fair value is below the carrying value at the end of the reporting period.
real estate investments
on at least an annual basis, the company obtains independent appraisals for substantially all of its real estate investments. in
addition, the carrying value of all real estate property is reviewed for impairment on a quarterly basis or when events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be
recoverable. the review for impairment considers the valuation from the independent appraisal, when applicable, and incorporates an estimate of the undiscounted cash flows expected to result from the
use and eventual disposition of the real estate property. an impairment loss is recognized if the expected future undiscounted cash flows are less than the carrying value of the real estate property.
the impairment loss is measured as the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds fair value.
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
1. summary of significant accounting policies (continued)
other investments
mortgage loans
a
mortgage loan is considered impaired when it is probable that the company will be unable to collect principal and interest amounts due. for mortgage loans
that are determined to be impaired, a reserve is established for the difference between the amortized cost and the fair market value of the underlying collateral. in estimating fair value, the company
uses interest rates reflecting the current real estate financing market returns. the company did not have any impaired mortgage loans at december31, 2008 and 2007.
venture capital investments and non-public common and preferred equity securities
externally
managed venture capital investments and non-public and preferred equity securities are reviewed quarterly for
other-than-temporary impairment by the external fund manager and the company's portfolio managers. internally managed venture capital investments and non-public and
preferred equity securities are reviewed quarterly by the company's portfolio managers. the company's portfolio managers and the external fund manager review and consider a variety of factors in
determining the valuation of the investments and the potential for other-than-temporary impairments. factors considered include the following:
the investee's most recent financing events;
an analysis of whether a fundamental deterioration or improvement has occurred;
whether the investee's progress has been substantially more or less than expected;
whether or not the valuations have improved or declined significantly in the investee's market sector;
whether or not the external fund manager and the company believe it is probable that the investee will need financing
within six months at a lower price than the company's carrying value; and
whether or not the company has the ability and intent to hold the investment for a period of time sufficient to allow for
recovery, enabling the company to receive value equal to or greater than its cost.
an
impairment loss is recognized if, based on the specific facts and circumstances, it is probable that the company will not be able to recover all of its cost of an individual holding.
the quarterly valuation procedures described above are in addition to the portfolio managers' ongoing responsibility to frequently monitor developments affecting those invested assets, paying
particular attention to events that might give rise to impairment write-downs.
other investments excluding venture capital investments and non-public common and preferred equity securities
included
in other investments are private equity limited partnerships, investments in hedge funds and real estate partnerships that generally report
investments on their balance sheet at fair value and are accounted for by the company using the equity method of accounting. the company reviews these investments for impairment no less frequently
than quarterly and monitors the performance throughout
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
1. summary of significant accounting policies (continued)
the
year through discussions with the managers/general partners. if the company becomes aware of an impairment of a partnership's investments at the balance sheet date prior to receiving the
partnership's financial statements, it will recognize an impairment by recording a reduction in the carrying value of the partnership with a corresponding charge to net investment income.
securities lending
the company has engaged in securities lending activities from which it generates net investment income by lending certain of its
investments to other institutions for short periods of time. borrowers of these securities provide collateral equal to at least 102% of the market value of the loaned securities plus accrued interest.
this collateral is held by a third-party custodian, and the company has the right to access the collateral only in the event that the institution borrowing the company's securities is in default under
the lending agreement. therefore, the company does not recognize the receipt of the collateral held by the third-party custodian or the obligation to return the collateral. the loaned securities
remain a recorded asset of the company. during the third quarter of 2008, the company began accepting only cash as collateral for securities on loan and restricted the manner in which that cash was
invested.
reinsurance recoverables
amounts recoverable from reinsurers are estimated in a manner consistent with the associated claim liability. the company reports its
reinsurance recoverables net of an allowance for estimated uncollectible reinsurance recoverables. the allowance is based upon the company's ongoing review of amounts outstanding, length of collection
periods, changes in reinsurer credit standing, disputes, applicable coverage defenses and other relevant factors. amounts deemed to
be uncollectible, including amounts due from known insolvent reinsurers, are written off against the allowance for estimated uncollectible reinsurance recoverables. any subsequent collections of
amounts previously written off are reported as part of claims and claim adjustment expenses. the company evaluates and monitors the financial condition of its reinsurers under voluntary reinsurance
arrangements to minimize its exposure to significant losses from reinsurer insolvencies.
deferred acquisition costs
amounts which vary with and are primarily related to the production of new insurance contracts, consisting of commissions and
premium-related taxes, are deferred and amortized pro rata over the contract periods in which the related premiums are earned. deferred acquisition costs are reviewed to determine if they are
recoverable from future income and, if not, are charged to expense. future investment income attributable to related premiums is taken into account in measuring the recoverability of the carrying
value of this asset. all other acquisition expenses are charged to operations as incurred.
contractholder receivables and payables
under certain workers' compensation insurance contracts with deductible features, the company is obligated to pay the claimant for the
full amount of the claim. the company is subsequently reimbursed by the policyholder for the deductible amount. these amounts are included on a gross basis
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
1. summary of significant accounting policies (continued)
in
the consolidated balance sheet in contractholder payables and contractholder receivables, respectively.
goodwill and other intangible assets
the company performs a review, on at least an annual basis, of goodwill held by the reporting units which are the company's three
operating and reportable segments: business insurance; financial, professional& international insurance; and personal insurance. the company estimates the fair value of its reporting units and
compares it to their carrying value, including goodwill.
if the carrying values of the reporting units exceed their fair value, the amount of the impairment is calculated and goodwill is adjusted accordingly.
in
2008, the company changed its methodology for estimating the fair value of its reporting units from a multiple of earnings model to a discounted cash flow model. this change was made
as a result of the effects of a severe disruption of the credit and equity markets and significant changes in the insurance industry that caused disparities between the multiple of earnings of the
company and the observed multiple of earnings of its competitors. the discounted cash flow model is an income approach to valuation that is based on a more detailed analysis for deriving a current
fair value of reporting units and is more representative of the company's current and expected future financial performance. the discounted cash flow model relies on the company's assumptions of its
future operating earnings, discounted utilizing an estimate of the company's cost of equity. other indefinite-lived intangible assets held by the company are also reviewed for impairment on at least
an annual basis. the classification of the asset as indefinite-lived is reassessed, and an impairment is recognized if the carrying amount of the asset exceeds its fair value.
intangible
assets that are deemed to have finite useful life are amortized over their useful lives. the carrying amount of intangible assets with a finite useful life is regularly
reviewed for indicators of impairment in value. impairment is recognized only if the carrying amount of the intangible asset is not recoverable from its undiscounted cash flows and is measured as the
difference between the carrying amount and the fair value of the asset.
the
company's review did not result in an impairment of its indefinite-lived or finite-lived intangible assets for the years ended december31, 2008, 2007 and 2006.
claims and claim adjustment expense reserves
claims and claim adjustment expense reserves represent estimates for both reported and unreported claims incurred and related expenses.
the reserves are adjusted regularly based upon experience. included in the claims and claim adjustment expense reserves in the consolidated balance sheet are certain reserves discounted to the present
value of estimated future payments. the liabilities for losses for most long-term disability payments under workers' compensation insurance and workers' compensation excess insurance,
which totaled $2.25billion and $2.09billion at december31, 2008 and 2007, respectively, were discounted using a rate of 5% at both december31, 2008 and 2007. reserves
totaling $33million for certain assumed reinsurance business at december31, 2007 were discounted using a rate of 7%. no reserves for such business were discounted at
december31, 2008.
in
determining claims and claim adjustment expense reserves, the company performs a continuing review of its overall position, its reserving techniques and its reinsurance. the reserves
are also
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
1. summary of significant accounting policies (continued)
reviewed
regularly by qualified actuaries employed by the company. these reserves represent the estimated ultimate cost of all incurred claims and claim adjustment expenses. since the reserves are
based on estimates, the ultimate liability may be more or less than such reserves. the effects of changes in such estimated reserves are included in the results of operations in the period in which
the estimates are changed. such changes in estimates could occur in a future period and may be material to the company's results of operations and financial position in such period.
other liabilities
included in other liabilities in the consolidated balance sheet is the company's estimate of its liability for guaranty fund and other
insurance-related assessments. the liability for expected state guaranty fund and other premium-based assessments is recognized as the company writes or becomes obligated to write or renew the
premiums on which the assessments are expected to be based. the liability for loss-based assessments is recognized as the related losses are incurred. at december31, 2008 and 2007,
the company had a liability of $375million and $278million, respectively, for guaranty fund and other insurance-related assessments and related recoverables of $11million at
both dates. the liability for such assessments and the related recoverables are not discounted for the time value of money. the loss-based assessments are expected to be paid over a period
ranging from one year to the life expectancy of certain workers' compensation claimants and the recoveries are expected to occur over the same period of time.
also
included in other liabilities is an accrual for policyholder dividends. certain insurance contracts, primarily workers' compensation, are participating whereby dividends are paid to
policyholders in accordance with contract provisions. net written premiums for participating dividend policies were approximately 1% of total company net written premiums for each of the years ended
december31, 2008, 2007 and 2006. policyholder dividends are accrued against earnings using best available estimates of amounts to be paid. the liability accrued for policyholder dividends
totaled $45million and $39million at december31, 2008 and 2007, respectively.
treasury stock
treasury stock represents the cost of common stock repurchased by the company, which stock represents authorized and unissued shares of
the company under the minnesota business corporation act.
statutory accounting practices
the company's insurance subsidiaries, domiciled principally in the states of connecticut and minnesota, prepare statutory financial
statements in accordance with the accounting practices prescribed or permitted by the insurance departments of the states of domicile. prescribed statutory accounting practices are those practices
that are incorporated directly or by reference in state laws, regulations, and general administrative rules applicable to all insurance enterprises domiciled in a particular state. permitted statutory
accounting practices include practices not prescribed by the domiciliary state, but allowed by the domiciliary state regulatory authority. the impact of any permitted accounting practices on statutory
surplus of the company is not material.
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
1. summary of significant accounting policies (continued)
premiums and unearned premium reserves
premiums are recognized as revenues pro rata over the policy period. unearned premium reserves represent the unexpired portion of
policy premiums. accrued retrospective premiums are included in premium balances receivable. premium balances receivable are reported net of an allowance for estimated uncollectible premium amounts.
ceded
premiums are charged to income over the applicable term of the various reinsurance contracts with third party reinsurers. prepaid reinsurance premiums represent the unexpired
portion of premiums ceded to reinsurers and are reported as part of other assets.
reinsurance to close
under the accounting conventions used by lloyd's members, each underwriting account is normally kept open for three years and the
underwriting results determined at the end of the third year when the account is closed, although a longer period may be required in order to determine reserves at the required degree of
accuracy/confidence for exposures having significant uncertainty. when a year of account is closed, a reinsurance contract (the "reinsurance to close" or ritc) is entered into with a subsequent year
of account (normally the following year of account) in consideration for which all subsequent underwriting transactions resulting from the closing year and all previous years reinsured therein are
brought forward to (accepted by) the subsequent year of account.
the
amount of the assets received in an ritc is equal to the accepted claims including incurred but not reported (ibnr) claims and is undiscounted for the time value of money.
accordingly, there is no gain or loss at the time the assets and liabilities are acquired and recognized by the subsequent year of account. in addition, there is no impact on reported premiums and
losses as a result of an ritc transaction.
fee income
fee income includes servicing fees from carriers and revenues from large deductible policies and service contracts and is recognized
pro rata over the contract or policy periods.
other revenues
other revenues include revenues from premium installment charges, which are recognized as collected, revenues of noninsurance
subsidiaries other than fee income and gains and losses on dispositions of assets and redemption of debt, and other miscellaneous revenues.
income taxes
the company recognizes deferred income tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax effects attributable to temporary
differences between the financial statement and tax return bases of assets and liabilities, based on enacted tax rates and other provisions of the tax law. the effect of a change in tax laws or rates
on deferred tax assets and liabilities is recognized in income in the period in which such change is enacted. deferred tax assets are reduced by a valuation allowance if it is more likely than not
that all or some portion of the deferred tax assets will not be realized.
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
1. summary of significant accounting policies (continued)
foreign currency translation
the company assigns functional currencies to its foreign operations, which are generally the currencies of the local operating
environment. foreign currency amounts are remeasured to the functional currency, and the resulting foreign exchange gains or losses are reflected in earnings. functional currency amounts are then
translated into u.s. dollars. the change in unrealized foreign currency translation gain or loss during the year, net of tax, is a component of accumulated other changes in equity from nonowner
sources. the foreign currency remeasurement and translation are calculated using current exchange rates for items reported in the balance sheets and average exchange rates for items recorded in
earnings.
share-based compensation
the company has an employee stock incentive compensation plan that permits grants of nonqualified stock options, incentive stock
options, stock appreciation rights, restricted stock, deferred stock, stock units, performance awards and other stock-based or stock-denominated awards with respect to the company's common stock.
compensation
cost is measured based on the grant-date fair value of an award, determined pursuant to fas123r, share-based
payment, utilizing the assumptions discussed in note12.
compensation cost is recognized for financial reporting purposes over the period in which the employee is required to provide service in exchange for the award (generally the vesting period). in
connection with certain share-based awards, participants are entitled to receive dividends during the vesting period, either in cash or dividend equivalent shares, commensurate with the dividends paid
to common shareholders. dividends and dividend equivalent shares on awards that are expected to vest are recorded in retained earnings. dividends paid in cash are presented in the "dividends" caption
of retained earnings while dividend equivalent shares are presented in the "other" caption of retained earnings. dividends on awards that are not expected to vest are not subject to forfeiture and
are, therefore, recorded as compensation expense.
nature of operations
the company is organized into three reportable business segments: business insurance; financial, professional& international
insurance; and personal insurance. these segments reflect the manner in which the company's businesses are currently managed and represent an aggregation of products and services based on type of
customer, how the business is marketed and the manner in which risks are underwritten.
the
specific business segments are as follows:
business insurance
the business insurance segment offers a broad array of property and casualty insurance and insurance-related services to its clients
primarily in the united states. business insurance is organized into the following six groups, which collectively comprise business insurance core operations:
select accounts serves small businesses for property and casualty
products, including commercial multi-peril, property, general liability, commercial auto and workers' compensation insurance.
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
1. summary of significant accounting policies (continued)
commercial accounts serves mid-sized businesses for property
and casualty products, including property, general liability, commercial multi-peril, commercial auto and workers' compensation insurance.
national accounts comprises three business units. the largest provides
casualty products and services to large companies, with particular emphasis on workers' compensation, general liability and automobile liability, generally utilizing loss-sensitive
products such as collateralized deductibles or self-insured programs. national accounts also includes discover re, which provides property and casualty insurance products on an unbundled
basis using third-party administrators for insureds who utilize programs such as collateralized deductibles, captive reinsurers and self-insurance. in addition, national accounts includes
the commercial residual market business, which primarily offers workers' compensation products and services to the involuntary market.
industry-focused underwriting.the following units serve
targeted industries with differentiated combinations of insurance coverage, risk management, claims handling and other services:
construction serves a broad range of construction businesses, offering
guaranteed cost products for small to mid-sized policyholders and loss sensitive programs for larger accounts. for the larger accounts, the customer and the company work together in
actively managing and controlling exposure and claims and they share risk through policy features such as deductibles or retrospective rating. products offered include workers' compensation, general
liability, umbrella, commercial auto, property and inland marine coverages, and other risk management solutions.
technology serves small to large companies involved in telecommunications,
information technology, medical technology and electronics manufacturing, offering a comprehensive portfolio of products and services. these products include property, commercial auto, general
liability, workers' compensation, umbrella, internet liability, technology errors and omissions coverages and global companion products.
public sector services markets insurance products and services to public
entities including municipalities, counties, indian nation gaming and selected special government districts such as water and sewer utilities. the policies written by this unit typically cover
property, commercial auto, general liability and errors and omissions exposures.
oil& gas provides specialized property and liability products and
services for customers involved in the exploration and production of oil and natural gas, including operators and drilling contractors, as well as various service and supply companies and
manufacturers that support upstream operations. the policies written by this business group cover risks including physical damage, liability and business interruption.
agribusiness serves small to medium-sized agricultural businesses,
including farms, ranches, wineries and related operations, offering property and liability coverages other than workers' compensation.
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
1. summary of significant accounting policies (continued)
target risk underwriting.the following units serve
commercial businesses requiring specialized product underwriting, claims handling and risk management services:
national property provides traditional and customized property insurance
programs to large and mid-sized customers, including office building owners, manufacturers, municipalities and schools, retailers, and service businesses. these insurance programs cover
losses on buildings, business assets, personal property and business interruption exposures.
inland marine provides insurance for goods in transit and movable objects
for customers such as jewelers, museums, contractors and the transportation industry. builders' risk insurance is also offered to customers during the construction, renovation or repair of buildings
and other structures.
ocean marine serves the marine transportation industry and related
services, as well as other businesses involved in international trade. the company's product offerings in this unit fall under six main coverage categories: marine liability, cargo, hull and
machinery, protection and indemnity, pleasure craft, and marine property and liability.
excess casualty serves small to mid-sized commercial
businesses, offering mono-line umbrella and excess coverage where the company typically does not write the primary casualty coverage, or where other business units within the company
prefer to access the underwriting expertise and/or limit capacity of the excess casualty business unit.
boiler& machinery serves small to large companies, offering
comprehensive breakdown coverages for equipment, including property and business interruption coverages. through the boilerre unit, boiler& machinery also serves other property casualty
carriers that do not have in-house expertise with reinsurance, underwriting, engineering, claim handling and risk management services for this type of coverage.
global accounts provides insurance to u.s. companies with foreign property
and liability exposures (home-foreign), and foreign organizations with property and liability exposures located in the united states (reverse-flow), as part of a global
program.
specialized distribution.the following units market and
underwrite their products to customers predominantly through licensed wholesale, general and program agents that manage customers' unique insurance requirements:
northland provides insurance coverage for the commercial transportation
industry, as well as commercial liability and package policies for small, difficult to place specialty classes of commercial business on an admitted or excess and surplus lines basis.
national programs offers tailored property and casualty programs on an
admitted basis for customers with common risk characteristics or coverage requirements. programs available include those for entertainment, architects and engineers, equipment rental and golf
services.
business
insurance also includes the special liability group (which manages the company's asbestos and environmental liabilities); the assumed reinsurance, health care, and certain
international and other runoff operations; and policies written by the company's gulf operation (gulf), which is in runoff. these are collectively referred to as business insurance other. in december
2008, the company
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
1. summary of significant accounting policies (continued)
completed
the sale of unionamerica holdings limited (unionamerica), which comprised its united kingdom-based runoff insurance and reinsurance businesses. the sale was not material to the company's
results of operations or financial position.
financial, professional& international insurance
the financial, professional& international insurance segment includes surety and financial liability coverages, which primarily
use credit-based underwriting processes, as well as property and casualty products that are primarily marketed on a domestic basis in the united kingdom, the republic of ireland and canada, and on an
international basis through lloyd's. the segment includes the following groups:
bond& financial products provides a wide range of customers with
bond and insurance products and risk management services. the range of coverages includes surety and fidelity bonds for construction and general commercial enterprises; professional liability and
management liability for public corporations, private companies and not-for-profit organizations for losses caused by the negligence or misconduct of named directors and
officers; professional liability for a variety of professionals, such as lawyers, design professionals and real estate agents for liability from errors and omissions committed in the course of
professional conduct or practice; and a full range of property, auto, liability, fidelity and professional/management liability insurance for financial institutions, with a special focus on community
banks.
in
march 2007, the company completed the sale of its mexican surety subsidiary, afianzadora insurgentes,s.a. de c.v., which accounted for $25million and $78million of net
written premiums in the years ended december31, 2007 and 2006, respectively. the impact of this transaction was not material to the company's results of operations or financial position.
international includes business written through domestic operations in the
united kingdom, canada and the republic of ireland and business written as a corporate member at lloyd's. international, through its operations in the united kingdom, canada and the republic of
ireland, offers specialized insurance and risk management services to several customer groups, including those in the technology, public services, and financial and professional services industry
sectors. international, through its lloyd's syndicate (syndicate 5000), for which the company provides 100% of the capital, underwrites through five principal business unitsaviation,
marine, global property, accident& special risks, and power& utilities.
personal insurance
the personal insurance segment writes virtually all types of property and casualty insurance covering personal risks. the primary
coverages in personal insurance are automobile and homeowners insurance sold to individuals. these products are distributed through independent agents, sponsoring organizations such as employee and
affinity groups, joint marketing arrangements with other insurers and direct marketing.
automobile
policies provide coverage for liability to others for both bodily injury and property damage, and for physical damage to an insured's own vehicle from collision and various
other perils. in addition, many states require policies to provide first-party personal injury protection, frequently referred to as no-fault coverage.
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
1. summary of significant accounting policies (continued)
homeowners
policies are available for dwellings, condominiums, mobile homes and rental property contents. protection against losses to dwellings and contents from a wide variety of
perils (excluding flooding) is included in these policies, as well as coverage for liability arising from ownership or occupancy.
in
april 2007, the company completed the sale of its subsidiary, mendota insurance company, and its wholly-owned subsidiaries, mendakota insurance company and mendota insurance
agency,inc. these subsidiaries primarily offered nonstandard automobile coverage and accounted for approximately $49million and $187million of net written premiums for the
years ended december31, 2007 and 2006, respectively. the sale was not material to the company's results of operations or financial position.
2. segment information
the company is organized into three reportable business segments: business insurance; financial, professional& international insurance; and personal insurance. the accounting
policies used to generate the following segment data are the same as those described in the summary of significant accounting policies in note1.
except
as described below for certain legal entities, the company allocates its invested assets and the related net investment income to its reportable business segments. pretax net
investment income is allocated based upon an investable funds concept, which takes into account liabilities (net of non-invested assets) and appropriate capital considerations for each
segment. for investable funds, a benchmark investment yield is developed that reflects the estimated duration of the loss reserves' future cash flows, the interest rate environment at the time the
losses were incurred and
a+ rated corporate debt instrument yields. for capital, a benchmark investment yield is developed that reflects the average yield on the total investment portfolio. the benchmark investment yields are
applied to each segment's investable funds and capital, respectively, to produce a total notional investment income by segment. the company's actual net investment income is allocated to each segment
in proportion to the respective segment's notional investment income to total notional investment income. there are certain legal entities within the company that are dedicated to specific reportable
business segments. the invested assets and related net investment income from these legal entities are reported in the applicable business segment and are not allocated.
the
cost of the company's catastrophe treaty program is included in the company's ceded premiums and is allocated among reportable business segments based on an estimate of actual market
reinsurance pricing using expected losses calculated by the company's catastrophe model, adjusted for any experience adjustments.
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
2. segment information (continued)
the
following tables summarize the components of the company's revenues, operating income and total assets by reportable business segments:
(for the year ended
december31, in millions)
business
insurance
financial,
professional&
international
insurance
personal
insurance
total
reportable
segments
premiums
$
11,180
$
3,429
$
6,970
$
21,579
net investment income
1,917
2,792
fee income
other revenues
total operating revenues(1)
$
13,517
$
3,907
$
7,466
$
24,890
amortization and depreciation
$
2,357
$
$
1,544
$
4,697
income tax expense
1,073
operating income(1)
2,338
3,452
premiums
$
11,283
$
3,384
$
6,803
$
21,470
net investment income
2,708
3,761
fee income
other revenues
total operating revenues(1)
$
14,523
$
3,907
$
7,452
$
25,882
amortization and depreciation
$
2,278
$
$
1,448
$
4,507
income tax expense
1,064
1,752
operating income(1)
3,015
1,019
4,709
premiums
$
10,876
$
3,321
$
6,563
$
20,760
net investment income
2,538
3,515
fee income
other revenues
total operating revenues(1)
$
14,049
$
3,776
$
7,205
$
25,030
amortization and depreciation
$
2,109
$
$
1,282
$
4,160
income tax expense
1,635
operating income(1)
2,622
1,132
4,363
(1)operating
revenues for reportable business segments exclude net realized investment gains (losses). operating income for reportable business segments equals
net income excluding the after-tax impact of net realized investment gains (losses).
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
2. segment information (continued)
net
written premiums by market were as follows:
(for the year ended december31, in millions)
business insurance:
select accounts
$
2,756
$
2,711
$
2,663
commercial accounts
2,524
2,518
2,376
national accounts
1,056
1,135
industry-focused underwriting
2,396
2,301
2,196
target risk underwriting
1,593
1,665
1,629
specialized distribution
1,015
1,022
total business insurance core
11,204
11,266
11,021
business insurance other
total business insurance
11,220
11,318
11,046
financial, professional& international insurance:
bond& financial products
2,228
2,228
2,255
international
1,240
1,237
1,138
total financial, professional& international insurance
3,468
3,465
3,393
personal insurance:
automobile
3,660
3,628
3,692
homeowners and other
3,335
3,207
3,019
total personal insurance
6,995
6,835
6,711
total consolidated net written premiums
$
21,683
$
21,618
$
21,150
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
2. segment information (continued)
business segment reconciliations
(for the year ended december31, in millions)
revenue reconciliation
earned premiums
business insurance:
commercial multi-peril
$
2,988
$
3,087
$
3,056
workers' compensation
2,373
2,221
1,970
commercial automobile
1,957
2,026
1,999
property
1,895
1,989
1,901
general liability
1,959
1,917
1,929
other
total business insurance
11,180
11,283
10,876
financial, professional& international insurance:
fidelity and surety
1,163
1,070
1,093
general liability
1,005
international
1,228
1,231
1,101
other
total financial, professional& international insurance
3,429
3,384
3,321
personal insurance:
automobile
3,708
3,692
3,672
homeowners and other
3,262
3,111
2,891
total personal insurance
6,970
6,803
6,563
total earned premiums
21,579
21,470
20,760
net investment income
2,792
3,761
3,515
fee income
other revenues
total operating revenues for reportable segments
24,890
25,882
25,030
interest expense and other
(19
)
net realized investment gains (losses)
(415
)
total consolidated revenues
$
24,477
$
26,017
$
25,090
income reconciliation, net of tax
total operating income for reportable segments
$
3,452
$
4,709
$
4,363
interest expense and other(1)
(257
)
(209
)
(163
)
total operating income
3,195
4,500
4,200
net realized investment gains (losses)
(271
)
total consolidated net income
$
2,924
$
4,601
$
4,208
(1)the
primary component of interest expense and other is after-tax interest expense of $239million, $224million and
$207million in 2008, 2007 and 2006, respectively. the 2007 total also included a benefit of $52million from the favorable resolution of various prior year federal
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
2. segment information (continued)
tax
matters and an after-tax loss of $25million related to the company's redemption of its 4.50% contingently convertible debentures. the 2006 total also includes a
$27million after-tax gain on the redemption of the company's $593million, 7.60% subordinated debentures. see note8.
(at december31, in millions)
asset reconciliation(1):
business insurance
$
82,622
$
87,160
financial, professional& international insurance
13,356
14,099
personal insurance
13,151
13,300
total assets for reportable segments
109,129
114,559
other assets(2)
total consolidated assets
$
109,751
$
115,224
(1)the
amount of investments in equity method investees and total expenditures for additions to long-lived assets other than financial instruments
were not material.
(2)the
major components of other assets in 2008 and 2007 were other intangible assets, property and equipment and deferred taxes.
enterprise-wide disclosures
revenues from internal customers for the years ended december31, 2008, 2007 and 2006 were not material. foreign assets at
december31, 2008 and 2007 also were not material. the company does not have revenue from transactions with a single customer amounting to 10percent or more of its revenues.
the
following table presents revenues of the company's operations based on location:
(for the year ended december31, in millions)
u.s.
$
22,809
$
24,413
$
23,588
non-u.s.
1,668
1,604
1,502
total revenues
$
24,477
$
26,017
$
25,090
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
3. investments
fixed maturities
the amortized cost and fair value of investments in fixed maturities classified as available for sale were as follows:
gross unrealized
amortized
cost
fair
value
(at december31, 2008, in millions)
gains
losses
u.s. treasury securities and obligations of u.s. government and government agencies and authorities
$
1,681
$
$
$
1,841
obligations of states, municipalities and political subdivisions
38,598
39,062
debt securities issued by foreign governments
1,453
1,519
mortgage-backed securities, collateralized mortgage obligations and pass-through securities
6,266
6,059
all other corporate bonds
13,498
12,737
redeemable preferred stock
total
$
61,569
$
1,426
$
1,720
$
61,275
(at december31, 2007, in millions)
u.s. treasury securities and obligations of u.s. government and government agencies and authorities
$
2,092
$
$
$
2,150
obligations of states, municipalities and political subdivisions
38,111
38,822
debt securities issued by foreign governments
1,629
1,635
mortgage-backed securities, collateralized mortgage obligations and pass-through securities
7,108
7,116
all other corporate bonds
15,120
15,095
redeemable preferred stock
total
$
64,152
$
1,074
$
$
64,920
the
amortized cost and fair value of fixed maturities by contractual maturity follow. actual maturities will differ from contractual maturities because borrowers may have the right to
call or prepay obligations with or without call or prepayment penalties.
(at december31, 2008, in millions)
amortized
cost
fair
value
due in one year or less
$
2,982
$
3,009
due after 1year through 5years
16,285
16,568
due after 5years through 10years
17,476
17,602
due after 10years
18,560
18,037
55,303
55,216
mortgage-backed securities
6,266
6,059
total
$
61,569
$
61,275
at
december31, 2008 and 2007, the company held commercial mortgage-backed securities (cmbs, including fha project loans) of $766million and $935million,
respectively, which are
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
3. investments (continued)
included
in "all other corporate bonds" in the tables above. at december31, 2008, approximately $258million of these securities, or the loans backing such securities, contained
guarantees by the united states government or a government-sponsored enterprise and $20million were comprised of canadian non-guaranteed securities. the average credit rating of
the $508million of non-guaranteed securities at december31, 2008 was "aaa," and 93% of those securities were issued in 2004 and prior years. the cmbs portfolio is supported
by loans that are diversified across economic sectors and geographical areas.
the
company makes investments in residential collateralized mortgage obligations (cmos) that typically have high credit quality, offer good liquidity and are expected to provide an
advantage in yield compared to u.s. treasury securities. the company's investment strategy is to purchase cmo tranches which offer the most favorable return given the risks involved. one significant
risk evaluated is prepayment sensitivity. while prepayment risk (either shortening or lengthening of duration) and its effect on total return cannot be fully controlled, particularly when interest
rates move dramatically, the investment process generally favors securities that control this risk within expected interest rate ranges. the company does invest in other types of cmo tranches if a
careful assessment indicates a favorable risk/return tradeoff. the company does not purchase residual interests in cmos.
at
december31, 2008 and 2007, the company held cmos classified as available for sale with a fair value of $2.84billion and $3.59billion, respectively (in addition
to the cmbs securities of $766million and $935million, respectively, described above). approximately 35% and 31% of the company's cmo holdings are guaranteed by or fully collateralized
by securities issued by gnma, fnma or fhlmc at december31, 2008 and 2007, respectively. in addition, the company held $3.22billion and $3.52billion of gnma, fnma, fhlmc
(excluding fha project loans which are included with cmbs) mortgage-backed pass-through securities classified as available for sale at december31, 2008 and 2007, respectively. the
average credit rating of all of the above securities was "aaa" at both dates.
at
december31, 2008 and 2007, the company had $8million and $1.99billion, respectively, of securities on loan as part of a tri-party lending
agreement. during the third quarter of 2008, the company began accepting only cash as collateral for securities on loan and restricted the manner in which that cash was invested.
proceeds
from sales of fixed maturities classified as available for sale were $6.93billion, $7.32billion and $4.40billion in 2008, 2007 and 2006, respectively.
gross gains of $121million, $76million and $95million and gross losses of $168million, $34million and $121million were realized on those sales in 2008,
2007 and 2006, respectively.
at
december31, 2008 and 2007, the company's insurance subsidiaries had $4.32billion and $4.21billion, respectively, of securities on deposit at financial
institutions in certain states pursuant to the respective states' insurance regulatory requirements.
the
company has certain subsidiaries that are required to hold investments in trust or in escrow. the company held trust funds with a fair value of $4million and
$269million at december31, 2008 and 2007, respectively. funds deposited with third parties to be used as collateral to secure various liabilities on behalf of insureds, cedants and
other creditors had a fair value of $105million and $129million at december31, 2008 and 2007, respectively. other investments pledged as collateral
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
3. investments (continued)
securing
outstanding letters of credit had a fair value of $104million and $142million at december31, 2008 and 2007, respectively.
equity securities
the cost and fair value of investments in equity securities were as follows:
gross unrealized
fair
value
(at december31, 2008, in millions)
cost
gains
losses
common stock
$
$
$
$
non-redeemable preferred stock
total
$
$
$
$
gross unrealized
fair value
(at december31, 2007, in millions)
cost
gains
losses
common stock
$
$
$
$
non-redeemable preferred stock
total
$
$
$
$
proceeds
from sales of equity securities were $53million, $106million and $285million in 2008, 2007 and 2006, respectively. gross gains of $6million,
$10million and $29million and gross realized losses of $4million, $1million and $4million were realized on those sales in 2008, 2007 and 2006, respectively.
real estate
the company's real estate investments include warehouses, office buildings, land, and other commercial real estate assets that are
directly owned. the company negotiates commercial leases with individual tenants through unrelated, licensed real estate brokers. negotiated terms and conditions include, among others, rental rates,
length of lease period and improvements to the premises to be provided by the landlord.
proceeds
from the sale of real estate investments totaled $25million in 2008 and $11million in 2007. gross gains of $2million and $1million, respectively,
were realized on those sales and no gross losses were recognized on those sales. the company did not sell any real estate investments in 2006.
future
minimum rental income expected on operating leases relating to the company's real estate properties is $115million, $97million, $71million,
$43million, $26million, and $52million for 2009, 2010, 2011, 2012, 2013 and 2014 and thereafter, respectively.
short-term investments
short-term investments consist primarily of money market instruments and other debt securities purchased with a maturity of
less than one year. the amortized cost of these securities, which totaled $5.22billion and $5.19billion at december31, 2008 and 2007, respectively, approximates their fair
value.
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
3. investments (continued)
other investments
other investments include private equity limited partnerships, hedge funds, real estate partnerships, joint ventures,
non-public common and preferred equity securities, mortgage loans, venture capital investments and trading securities.
in
2007, the company completed the bundled sale of a substantial portion of its venture capital portfolio for total net proceeds of $397million, which are included on the
consolidated statement of cash flows in "proceeds from sales of other investments." the sale resulted in the realization of $81million of previously unrealized pretax net investment gains that
had been recorded as a component of accumulated other changes in equity from nonowner sources.
variable interest entities (vies)
the following entities are consolidated:
municipal truststhe company owns interests in various municipal trusts that were formed for the purpose of
allowing more flexibility to generate investment income in a manner consistent with the company's investment objectives and tax position. at december31, 2008 and 2007, there were 24 and 31
such trusts, respectively, which held a combined total of $277million and $355million, respectively, in municipal securities, of which $32million and $44million,
respectively, were owned by outside investors. the net carrying value of the trusts owned by the company at december31, 2008 and 2007 was $245million and $311million,
respectively.
the
company has a significant interest in the following vie, which is not consolidated because the company is not considered to be the primary beneficiary:
camperdown uk limited, which spc sold in december 2003the company's variable interest resulted from an
agreement to indemnify the purchaser in the event a specified reserve deficiency develops, a reserve-related foreign exchange impact occurs or a foreign tax adjustment is imposed on a
pre-sale reporting period. the maximum amount of this indemnification obligation is $125million. the carrying value of this obligation at december31, 2008 and 2007 was
$23million and $59million, respectively.
the
company has other significant interests in vies, including private equity funds and real estate entities. neither the carrying amounts nor the unfunded commitments related to these
entities are material.
the
following securities are not consolidated:
mandatorily redeemable preferred securities of trusts holding solely the subordinated debentures of the
companythese securities were issued by three separate trusts that were established for the sole purpose of issuing the securities to investors and are fully guaranteed by the company. the
subordinated debt that the company issued to these trusts is included in the "debt" section of liabilities on the company's consolidated balance sheet. that debt had a carrying value of
$309million and $310million at december31, 2008 and 2007, respectively.
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
3. investments (continued)
unrealized investment losses
the following tables summarize, for all investments in an unrealized loss position at december31, 2008 and 2007, the aggregate
fair value and gross unrealized loss by length of time those securities have been continuously in an unrealized loss position. the fair value amounts reported in the tables are estimates that are
prepared using the process described in note4. the company also relies upon estimates of several factors in its review and evaluation of individual investments, using the process described in
note 1, in determining whether such investments are other-than-temporarily impaired.
less than 12months
12months or longer
total
(at december31, 2008, in millions)
fair
value
gross
unrealized
losses
fair
value
gross
unrealized
losses
fair
value
gross
unrealized
losses
fixed maturities
u.s. treasury securities and obligations of u.s. government and government agencies and authorities
$
$
$
$
$
$
obligations of states, municipalities and political subdivisions
11,508
1,812
13,320
debt securities issued by foreign governments
mortgage-backed securities, collateralized mortgage obligations and pass-through securities
1,660
2,211
all other corporate bonds
5,734
2,112
7,846
redeemable preferred stock
total fixed maturities
18,933
1,172
4,494
23,427
1,720
equity securities
common stock
non-redeemable preferred stock
total equity securities
total
$
19,109
$
1,225
$
4,575
$
$
23,684
$
1,811
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
3. investments (continued)
less than 12months
12months or longer
total
(at december31, 2007, in millions)
fair
value
gross
unrealized
losses
fair
value
gross
unrealized
losses
fair
value
gross
unrealized
losses
fixed maturities
u.s. treasury securities and obligations of u.s. government and government agencies and authorities
$
$
$
$
$
$
obligations of states, municipalities and political subdivisions
3,428
2,044
5,472
debt securities issued by foreign governments
mortgage-backed securities, collateralized mortgage obligations and pass-through securities
3,118
3,956
all other corporate bonds
2,646
5,797
8,443
redeemable preferred stock
total fixed maturities
7,369
11,420
18,789
equity securities
common stock
non-redeemable preferred stock
total equity securities
total
$
7,508
$
$
11,500
$
$
19,008
$
the
following table summarizes for all fixed maturities and equity securities available for sale and for equity securities reported at fair value for which fair value is less than 80% of
amortized cost at december31, 2008, the gross unrealized investment loss by length of time those securities have continuously been in an unrealized loss position of greater than 20% of
amortized cost:
period for which fair value is less than 80% of amortized cost
(in millions)
less than
3 months
greater than
3 months,
less than
6 months
greater than
6 months,
less than
12 months
greater than
12 months
total
fixed maturities:
mortgage-backed securities
$
$
$
$
$
other
total fixed maturities
equity securities
total
$
$
$
$
$
these
unrealized losses at december31, 2008 represent approximately 1% of the combined fixed maturity and equity security portfolios on a pretax basis and approximately 2% of
shareholders' equity on an after-tax basis.
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
3. investments (continued)
impairment charges
impairment charges included in net realized investment gains (losses) were as follows:
(for the year ended december31, in millions)
fixed maturities
$
$
$
equity securities
other investments
total
$
$
$
concentrations and credit quality
at december31, 2008 and 2007, the company had concentrations of credit risk in state, municipal and political subdivision
obligations from the following states: texas, $3.73billion and $3.45billion, respectively; california, $1.99billion and $2.07billion, respectively; and illinois,
$1.95billion and $1.93billion, respectively. these concentrations exclude advance refunded and escrowed-to-maturity bonds, which are bonds for which an
irrevocable trust has been established to fund the remaining payments of principal and interest. such escrow accounts are verified as to their sufficiency by an external auditor and almost exclusively
involve u.s. treasury securities. the company does not have any individually significant exposures.
included
in fixed maturities are below investment grade assets totaling $1.20billion and $1.64billion at december31, 2008 and 2007, respectively. the company
defines its below investment grade assets as those securities rated below investment grade by external rating agencies, or the equivalent by the company when a public rating does not exist. such
assets include publicly traded below investment grade bonds and certain other privately issued bonds that are classified as below investment grade loans.
the
company monitors creditworthiness of counterparties to financial instruments by using controls that include credit approvals, limits and other monitoring procedures.
net investment income
(for the year ended december31, in millions)
gross investment income (loss)
fixed maturities
$
2,915
$
2,893
$
2,738
equity securities
short-term securities
real estate
other investments
(292
)
gross investment income
2,836
3,820
3,580
investment expenses
net investment income
$
2,792
$
3,761
$
3,517
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
3. investments (continued)
net realized and unrealized investment gains (losses)
(for the year ended december31, in millions)
net realized investment gains (losses)
fixed maturities
$
(371
)
$
$
(33
)
equity securities
(72
)
other
net realized investment gains (losses)
$
(415
)
$
$
changes
in net unrealized gains (losses) on investment securities that are included as a separate component of accumulated other changes in equity from nonowner sources were as follows:
(at and for the year ended december31, in millions)
change in net unrealized investment gains (losses)
fixed maturities
$
(1,062
)
$
$
equity securities
(97
)
(22
)
(4
)
venture capital
(9
)
(91
)
other investments
(23
)
(1,191
)
related tax expense (benefit)
(427
)
change in net unrealized gain on investment securities
(764
)
balance, beginning of year
balance, end of year
$
(144
)
$
$
derivative financial instruments
derivative instruments designated as hedging instruments
the company has foreign currency hedges of net investments in foreign operations in which derivatives (foreign currency forward
contracts) hedge the foreign currency exposure. the effective portion of the change in fair value of the derivative hedging the net investment, including any forward premium or discount, is reflected
in the accumulated other changes in equity from nonowner sources as part of the foreign currency translation adjustment. for the years ended december31, 2008 and 2007, the amount included in
changes in equity from nonowner sources was a loss of $2million in 2008 and a gain of $1million in 2007. with regard to hedge ineffectiveness in 2008 and 2007, the company had no
realized gains or losses in either year.
derivative instruments not designated as hedging instruments
derivatives that are not designated or do not qualify as hedges are carried at fair value with changes in value reflected in net
realized investment gains (losses). the company has certain u.s. treasury futures contracts and foreign currency forward contracts, which are not designated as hedges at december31, 2008 and
2007.
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
3. investments (continued)
the
company engaged in u.s. treasury note futures transactions to modify the duration of specific assets within the investment portfolio. the company enters into 90-day
futures contracts on 2-year, 5-year, 10-year and 30-year u.s. treasury notes which require a daily mark-to-market settlement
with the broker. the notional value of the open u.s. treasury futures contracts was $380million and $250million at december31, 2008 and 2007, respectively. these derivative
instruments are not designated and do not qualify as hedges under fas133 and as such the daily mark-to-market changes in fair value are reflected in net realized
investment gains (losses). net realized investment
gains (losses) in 2008 and 2007 included net losses of $53million and $8million, respectively, related to u.s. treasury futures contracts which are settled daily.
the
company owns six million non-public stock purchase warrants of platinum underwriters holdings,ltd., a publicly-held company. these warrants are not
designated and do not qualify as hedges under fas133 and as such the mark-to-market changes in fair value are reflected in net realized investment gains (losses). in
2008 and 2007, the company recorded net realized investment gains of $10million and $21million, respectively, related to the company's holdings of stock purchase warrants of platinum
underwriters holdings,ltd.
the
company purchases investments that have embedded derivatives, primarily convertible debt securities. these embedded derivatives are carried at fair value with changes in value
reflected in net realized investment gains (losses). derivatives embedded in convertible debt securities are reported on a combined basis with their host instrument and are classified as fixed
maturity securities. in 2008 and 2007, the company recorded net realized investment losses of $77million and $23million, respectively, related to these embedded derivatives. the
company divested substantially all of its holdings in convertible debt securities in 2008.
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
4. fair value measurements
the company's estimates of fair value for financial assets and financial liabilities are based on the framework established in fas157. the framework is based on the inputs used
in valuation and gives the highest priority to quoted prices in active markets and requires that observable inputs be used in the valuations when available. the disclosure of fair value estimates in
the fas157 hierarchy is based on whether the significant inputs into the valuation are observable. in determining the level of the hierarchy in which the estimate is disclosed, the highest
priority is given to unadjusted quoted prices in
active markets and the lowest priority to unobservable inputs that reflect the company's significant market assumptions. the three levels of the hierarchy are as follows:
level1unadjusted
quoted market prices for identical assets or liabilities in active markets that the company has the ability
to access.
level2quoted
prices for similar assets or liabilities in active markets; quoted prices for identical or similar assets or
liabilities in inactive markets; or valuations based on models where the significant inputs are observable (e.g.,interest rates, yield curves, prepayment speeds, default rates, loss
severities, etc.) or can be corroborated by observable market data.
level3valuations
based on models where significant inputs are not observable. the unobservable inputs reflect the company's
own assumptions about the inputs that market participants would use.
valuation of investments reported at fair value in financial statements
the fair value of a financial instrument is the estimated amount at which the instrument could be exchanged in an orderly transaction
between knowledgeable, unrelated willing parties, i.e., not in a forced transaction. the estimated fair value of a financial instrument may differ from the amount that could be realized if the
security was sold in an immediate sale, e.g., a forced transaction. additionally, the valuation of fixed maturity investments is more subjective when markets are less liquid due to the lack of market
based inputs, which may increase the potential that the estimated fair value (i.e., the carrying amount) of an investment is not reflective of the price at which an actual transaction would occur.
for
investments that have quoted market prices in active markets, the company uses the quoted market prices as fair value and includes these prices in the amounts disclosed in
level1 of the hierarchy. the company receives the quoted market prices from a third party, nationally recognized pricing service (pricing service). when quoted market prices are unavailable,
the company utilizes a pricing service to determine an estimate of fair value, which is mainly for its fixed maturity investments. the fair value estimates provided from this pricing service are
included in the amount disclosed in level2 of the hierarchy. if quoted market prices and an estimate from a pricing service are unavailable, the company produces an estimate of fair value
based on internally developed valuation techniques,
which, depending on the level of observable market inputs, will render the fair value estimate as level2 or level3. the company bases all of its estimates of fair value for assets on
the bid price as it represents what a third party market participant would be willing to pay in an arm's length transaction.
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
4. fair value measurements (continued)
fixed maturities
the company utilizes a pricing service to estimate fair value measurements for approximately 99% of its fixed maturities. the pricing
service utilizes market quotations for fixed maturity securities that have quoted prices in active markets. since fixed maturities other than u.s. treasury securities generally do not trade on a daily
basis, the pricing service prepares estimates of fair value measurements for these securities using its proprietary pricing applications which include available relevant market information, benchmark
curves, benchmarking of like securities, sector groupings and matrix pricing. additionally, the pricing service uses an option adjusted spread model to develop prepayment and interest rate scenarios.
the
pricing service evaluates each asset class based on relevant market information, relevant credit information, perceived market movements and sector news. the market inputs utilized
in the pricing evaluation, listed in the approximate order of priority, include: benchmark yields, reported trades, broker/dealer quotes, issuer spreads, two-sided markets, benchmark
securities, bids, offers, reference data, and industry and economic events. the extent of the use of each market input depends on the asset class and the market conditions. depending on the security,
the priority of the use of inputs may change or some market inputs may not be relevant. for some securities additional inputs may be necessary.
the
pricing service utilized by the company has indicated that they will only produce an estimate of fair value if there is objectively verifiable information to produce a valuation. if
the pricing service discontinues pricing an investment, the company would be required to produce an estimate of fair value using some of the same methodologies as the pricing service, but would have
to make assumptions for market based inputs that are unavailable due to market conditions.
the
fair value estimates of most fixed maturity investments are based on observable market information rather than market quotes. accordingly, the estimates of fair value for such fixed
maturities, other than u.s. treasury securities, provided by the pricing service are included in the amount disclosed in level2 of the hierarchy. the estimated fair value of u.s. treasury
securities is included in the amount disclosed in level1 as the estimates are based on unadjusted market prices.
the
company holds privately placed corporate bonds and estimates the fair value of these bonds using an internal matrix that is based on market information regarding interest rates,
credit spreads and liquidity. the underlying source data for calculating the matrix of credit spreads relative to the u.s. treasury curve are the merrill lynch u.s. corporate index and the merrill
lynch high yield bb rated index. the company includes the fair value estimates of these corporate bonds in level2 since all significant inputs are market observable. as many of these
securities are issued by public companies, the company compares the estimates of fair value to the fair values of these companies' publicly traded debt to test the validity of the internal pricing
matrix.
while
the vast majority of the company's municipal bonds are included in level2, the company holds a small number of municipal bonds which are not valued by the pricing service
and estimates the fair value of these bonds using an internal pricing matrix with some unobservable inputs that are significant to the valuation. due to the limited amount of observable market
information, the company includes the fair value estimates for these particular bonds in level3. additionally, the company holds a small amount of fixed maturities that have characteristics
that make them unsuitable for matrix pricing. for these fixed maturities, the company obtains a quote from a broker (typically a market
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
4. fair value measurements (continued)
maker).
due to the disclaimers on the quotes that indicate that the price is indicative only, the company includes these fair value estimates in level3.
equitiespublic common and preferred
for public common and preferred stocks, the company receives prices from a nationally recognized pricing service that are based on
observable market transactions and includes these estimates in the amount disclosed in level1. infrequently, current market quotes in active markets are unavailable for certain nonredeemable
preferred stocks held by the company. in these instances, the company receives an estimate of fair value from the pricing service that provides fair value estimates for the company's fixed maturities.
the service utilizes some of the same methodologies to price the nonredeemable preferred stocks as it does for the fixed maturities. the company includes the estimate in the amount disclosed in
level2.
other investments
venture capital investments and non-public common and preferred equity securities
the
company holds investments in venture capital investments and non-public common and preferred equity securities, with a fair value estimate of
$224million, reported in other investments, where the fair value estimate is determined either internally or by an external fund manager based on recent filings, operating results, balance
sheet stability, growth and other business and market sector fundamentals. the company holds one private common stock with a fair value estimate of $162million at december31, 2008, for
which the estimate of fair value is provided by a third party appraiser on behalf of the investee and adjusted for a liquidity discount which takes into consideration the restriction on the common
stock. due to the significant unobservable inputs in these valuations, the company includes the total fair value estimate for all of these investments at december31, 2008 in the amount
disclosed in level3.
derivatives
the company uses derivatives generally to hedge its net investment in a foreign subsidiary. the company also holds
non-public warrants in a public company and has convertible bonds containing embedded conversion options that are reported separately from the host bond contract. for the derivatives used
to hedge the net investment of a foreign subsidiary, the company uses quoted market prices to estimate fair value and includes the fair value estimate, which was in a liability position of
approximately $2million at december31, 2008, in level1. the company estimates fair value for the warrants using an option pricing model with observable market inputs. because
the warrants are not market traded and information concerning market participants is not available, the company includes the fair value estimate of $87million at december31, 2008 in
the amount disclosed in level3other investments. the company separately values the embedded conversion options based on observable market inputs and includes the estimate of fair
value in level2.
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
4. fair value measurements (continued)
fair value hierarchy
the following table presents the level within the fair value hierarchy at which the company's financial assets and financial
liabilities are measured on a recurring basis at december31, 2008.
(in millions)
total
level1
level2
level3
invested assets:
fixed maturities
$
61,275
$
1,813
$
59,308
$
equity securities
other investments
total
$
62,013
$
2,195
$
59,353
$
other liabilities
$
$
$
$
the
following table presents the changes in the level3 fair value category during the period indicated.
(in millions)
twelve months ended
december31, 2008
balance at january1, 2008
$
total realized and unrealized gains or (losses):
included in realized investment gains and (losses)
included in increases or (decreases) in accumulated other changes in equity from nonowner sources
(52
)
purchases, (sales), issuances and settlements
(11
)
transfers in and/or (out) of level3
balance at december31, 2008
$
amount of total gains for the period included in earnings attributable to changes in the fair value of assets still held at the reporting date
$
the
company had no financial assets or financial liabilities that were measured at fair value on a non-recurring basis during the twelve months ended december31,
2008.
valuation of financial instruments disclosed at fair value
the company uses various financial instruments in the normal course of its business. the company's insurance contracts are excluded
from fas107, disclosures about fair value of financial instruments and, therefore, are not included in the amounts discussed below.
the
carrying values of cash, short-term securities, mortgage loans and investment income accrued approximated their fair values. see notes1 and 3.
the
carrying values of $718million and $885million of financial instruments classified as other assets approximated their fair values at december31, 2008 and
2007, respectively. the carrying values of $4.34billion and $4.68billion of financial instruments classified as other liabilities at december31, 2008 and 2007, respectively,
also approximated their fair values. fair value is determined using various methods including discounted cash flows, as appropriate for the various financial instruments.
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
4. fair value measurements (continued)
the
carrying value and fair value of the company's debt at december31, 2008 was $6.18billion and $5.44billion, respectively. the respective totals at
december31, 2007 were $6.24billion and $6.06billion. the company utilizes a pricing service to estimate fair value measurements for approximately 96% of its debt, other than
commercial paper. the pricing service utilizes market quotations for debt that have quoted prices in active markets. when quoted prices are unavailable, the pricing service prepares estimates of fair
value measurements for these securities using its proprietary pricing applications which include available relevant market information, benchmark curves, benchmarking of like securities, sector
groupings and matrix pricing.
for
some debt securities, primarily the junior subordinated debentures, the pricing service is unable to provide an estimate of fair value. for these securities, the company utilizes
pricing estimates from a nationally recognized broker/dealer to estimate fair value. the broker/dealer prepares estimates of fair value for these securities using its proprietary pricing applications
which include relevant market information, benchmark curves, benchmarking of like securities, sector groupings and matrix pricing. if estimates of fair value are unavailable from the pricing service
or the broker/dealer, the company produces an estimate of fair value based on internally developed valuation techniques which are based on discounted cash flow methodology and incorporates all
available relevant observable market inputs. the company bases all of its estimates of fair value for its debt on the bid price as it represents what a third party market participant would be willing
to pay in an arm's length transaction.
the
fair value of commercial paper included in debt outstanding at december31, 2008 and 2007 approximated its book value because of its short-term nature.
5. reinsurance
the company's consolidated financial statements reflect the effects of assumed and ceded reinsurance transactions. assumed reinsurance refers to the acceptance of certain insurance risks
that other insurance companies have underwritten. ceded reinsurance involves transferring certain insurance risks (along with the related written and earned premiums) the company has underwritten to
other insurance companies who agree to share these risks. the primary purpose of ceded reinsurance is to protect the company, at a cost, from volatility in excess of the amount it is prepared to
accept. reinsurance is placed on both a quota-share and excess of loss basis. ceded reinsurance arrangements do not discharge the company as the primary insurer, except for cases involving a novation.
included
in reinsurance recoverables are certain amounts related to structured settlements. structured settlements comprise annuities purchased from various life insurance companies to
settle certain personal physical injury claims, of which workers' compensation claims comprise a significant portion. in cases where the company did not receive a release from the claimant, the
structured settlement is included in reinsurance recoverables as the company retains the contingent liability to the claimant. in the event that the life insurance company fails to make the required
annuity payments, the company would be required to make such payments.
the
company evaluates and monitors the financial condition of its reinsurers under voluntary reinsurance arrangements to minimize its exposure to significant losses from reinsurer
insolvencies. in addition, in the ordinary course of business, the company may become involved in coverage disputes with its reinsurers. some of these disputes could result in lawsuits and
arbitrations brought by or against the reinsurers to determine the company's rights and obligations under the various reinsurance
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
5. reinsurance (continued)
agreements.
the company employs dedicated specialists and strategies to manage reinsurance collections and disputes.
the
company is also required to participate in various involuntary reinsurance arrangements through assumed reinsurance, principally with regard to residual market mechanisms in workers'
compensation and automobile insurance. the company provides services for several of these involuntary arrangements ("mandatory pools and associations") under which it writes such residual market
business directly, then cedes 100% of this business to the mandatory pool. such servicing arrangements are arranged to mitigate credit risk to the company, as any ceded balances are jointly backed by
all the pool members.
the
company utilizes a general catastrophe reinsurance treaty with unaffiliated reinsurers to manage its exposure to losses resulting from catastrophes. in addition to the coverage
provided under this treaty, the company also utilizes a catastrophe bond program, as well as a northeast catastrophe reinsurance treaty, to protect against losses resulting from catastrophes in the
northeastern united states.
certain
of the assumed reinsurance contracts that the company has entered into with non-affiliated companies on an excess of loss basis do not transfer insurance risk. these
contracts, which totaled $46million and $165million at december31, 2008 and 2007, respectively, are accounted for using deposit accounting and are included in other liabilities
in the consolidated balance sheet.
the
following is a summary of reinsurance financial data reflected in the consolidated statement of income:
(for the year ended december31, in millions)
written premiums
direct
$
23,469
$
23,824
$
23,635
assumed
ceded
(2,154
)
(2,580
)
(2,889
)
total net written premiums
$
21,683
$
21,618
$
21,150
earned premiums
direct
$
23,516
$
24,000
$
23,280
assumed
ceded
(2,323
)
(2,710
)
(2,998
)
total net earned premiums
$
21,579
$
21,470
$
20,760
percentage of assumed earned premiums to net earned premiums
1.8
%
0.8
%
2.3
%
ceded claims and claim adjustment expenses incurred
$
1,605
$
1,299
$
2,158
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
5. reinsurance (continued)
reinsurance
recoverables include amounts recoverable on both paid and unpaid claims and were as follows:
(at december31, in millions)
gross reinsurance recoverables on paid and unpaid claims and claim adjustment expenses
$
9,376
$
10,731
allowance for uncollectible reinsurance
(618
)
(688
)
net reinsurance recoverables
8,758
10,043
structured settlements
3,517
3,615
mandatory pools and associations
1,957
1,983
total reinsurance recoverables
$
14,232
$
15,641
terrorism risk insurance acts
on november26, 2002, the terrorism risk insurance act of 2002 (the terrorism act) was enacted into federal law and established
the terrorism risk insurance program (the program), a temporary federal program in the department of the treasury, that provided for a system of shared public and private compensation for certain
insured losses resulting from acts of terrorism or war committed by or on behalf of a foreign interest. the program was scheduled to terminate on december31, 2005. in december 2005, the
terrorism risk insurance extension act of 2005 (the terrorism extension act) was enacted into federal law, reauthorizing the program through december31, 2007, while reducing the federal role
under the program. in december 2007, the terrorism risk insurance program reauthorization act of 2007 was enacted into federal law, extending coverage to include domestic acts of terrorism and
reauthorizing the program through 2014. the three acts are hereinafter collectively referred to as "the acts."
in
order for a loss to be covered under the program (subject losses), the loss must meet certain aggregate industry loss minimums and must be the result of an event that is certified as
an act of terrorism by the u.s. secretary of the treasury. the annual aggregate industry loss minimum is $100million through 2014. the original program excluded from participation certain of
the following types of insurance: federal crop insurance, private mortgage insurance, financial guaranty insurance, medical malpractice insurance, health or life insurance, flood insurance, and
reinsurance. the terrorism extension act exempted from coverage certain additional types of insurance, including commercial automobile, professional liability (other than directors and officers'),
surety, burglary and theft, and farm-owners multi-peril. in the case of a war declared by congress, only workers' compensation losses are covered by the acts. the acts generally require
that all commercial property casualty insurers licensed in the united states participate in the program. under the program, a participating insurer is entitled to be reimbursed by the federal
government for 85% of subject losses, after an insurer deductible, subject to an annual cap. the federal reimbursement percentage is 85% through 2014.
the
deductible for any calendar year is equal to 20% of the insurer's direct earned premiums for covered lines for the calendar year. the company's estimated deductible under the program
is $2.16billion for 2009. the annual cap limits the amount of aggregate subject losses for all participating insurers to $100billion. once subject losses have reached the
$100billion aggregate during a program year, participating insurers will not be liable under the program for additional covered terrorism losses
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
5. reinsurance (continued)
for
that program year. the company has had no terrorism-related losses since the program was established. because the acts are relatively new and their interpretation is untested, there may be
uncertainty as to how they will be applied to specific circumstances. further, given the unpredictable frequency and severity of terrorism losses, as well as the limited terrorism coverage in the
company's own reinsurance program, future losses from acts of terrorism, particularly those involving nuclear, biological, chemical or radiological events, could be material to the company's operating
results,
financial position and/or liquidity in future periods. the company will continue to manage this type of catastrophic risk by monitoring and controlling terrorism risk aggregations to the best of its
ability.
6. goodwill and other intangible assets
goodwill
the following table presents the carrying amount of the company's goodwill by segment at december31, 2008 and 2007:
(in millions)
business insurance
$
2,168
$
2,168
financial, professional& international insurance
personal insurance
other
total
$
3,366
$
3,366
other intangible assets
the following presents a summary of other intangible assets by major asset class at december31, 2008 and 2007:
(at december31 2008, in millions)
gross
carrying
amount
accumulated
amortization
net
intangibles subject to amortization
customer-related
$
1,036
$
$
fair value adjustment on claims and claim adjustment expense reserves and reinsurance recoverables(1)
total intangible assets subject to amortization
1,227
intangible assets not subject to amortization
total other intangible assets
$
1,443
$
$
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
6. goodwill and other intangible assets (continued)
(at december31 2007, in millions)
gross
carrying
amount
accumulated
amortization
net
intangibles subject to amortization
customer-related
$
1,036
$
$
fair value adjustment on claims and claim adjustment expense reserves and reinsurance recoverables(1)
(26
)
total intangible assets subject to amortization
1,227
intangible assets not subject to amortization
total other intangible assets
$
1,443
$
$
(1)the
fair value adjustment of $191million was recorded in connection with the merger of the st.paul companies,inc. and travelers
property casualty corp. in 2004 and was based on management's estimate of nominal claims and claim adjustment expense reserves and reinsurance recoverables (after adjusting for conformity with the
acquirer's accounting policy on discounting of workers' compensation reserves), expected payment patterns, the april1, 2004 u.s. treasury spot rate yield curve, a leverage ratio assumption
(reserves to statutory surplus), and a cost of capital expressed as a spread over risk-free rates. the method used calculates a risk adjustment to a risk-free discounted
reserve that will, if reserves run off as expected, produce results that yield the assumed cost-of-capital on the capital supporting the loss reserves. the fair value
adjustment is reported as an intangible asset on the consolidated balance sheet, and the amounts measured in accordance with the acquirer's accounting policies for insurance contracts are reported as
part of the claims and claim adjustment expense reserves and reinsurance recoverables. the intangible asset will be recognized into income over the expected payment pattern. because the time value of
money and the risk adjustment (cost of capital) components of the intangible asset run off at different rates, the amount recognized in income may be a net benefit in some periods and a net expense in
other periods.
the
following presents a summary of the company's amortization expense for other intangible assets by major asset class:
(for the year ended december31, in millions)
customer-related
$
$
$
marketing-related
fair value adjustment on claims and claim adjustment expense reserves and reinsurance recoverables
total amortization expense
$
$
$
intangible
asset amortization expense is estimated to be $100million in 2009, $86million in 2010, $69million in 2011, $52million in 2012 and
$45million in 2013.
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
7. insurance claim reserves
claims and claim adjustment expense reserves were as follows:
(at december31, in millions)
property-casualty
$
54,646
$
57,619
accident and health
total
$
54,723
$
57,700
the
table below is a reconciliation of beginning and ending property casualty reserve balances for claims and claim adjustment expenses.
(at and for the year ended december31, in millions)
claims and claim adjustment expense reserves at beginning of year
$
57,619
$
59,202
$
61,007
less reinsurance recoverables on unpaid losses
14,521
16,358
18,112
net reserves at beginning of year
43,098
42,844
42,895
estimated claims and claim adjustment expenses for claims arising in the current year
14,504
12,848
12,533
estimated decrease in claims and claim adjustment expenses for claims arising in prior years
(1,725
)
(672
)
(429
)
acquisitions(1)
total increases
12,779
12,176
12,642
claims and claim adjustment expense payments for claims arising in:
current year
5,761
4,528
4,279
prior years
7,356
7,417
8,632
total payments
13,117
11,945
12,911
sale of subsidiary(2)
(790
)
unrealized foreign exchange (gain) loss
(658
)
net reserves at end of year
41,312
43,098
42,844
plus reinsurance recoverables on unpaid losses
13,334
14,521
16,358
claims and claim adjustment expense reserves at end of year
$
54,646
$
57,619
$
59,202
(1)in
february 2006, the 2003 and prior years of account of lloyd's syndicates 5000 and 779 closed through reinsurance to close (ritc) into the
2004year of account. see "reinsurance to close" section of note1.
(2)in
december 2008, the company sold its united kingdom based subsidiary, unionamerica holdings,ltd., which was in runoff.
gross
claims and claim adjustment expense reserves at december31, 2008 decreased by $2.97billion from the same date in 2007, primarily reflecting favorable prior year
reserve development during 2008, payments related to operations in runoff (including asbestos and environmental payments) and the sale of unionamerica, partially offset by catastrophe losses incurred.
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
7. insurance claim reserves (continued)
gross
claims and claim adjustment expense reserves at december31, 2007 decreased by $1.58billion from the same date in 2006, primarily reflecting payments related to
operations in runoff (including asbestos and environmental payments), prior years' hurricane losses, and favorable prior year reserve development.
the
$1.19billion decline in reinsurance recoverables in 2008 primarily reflected the sale of unionamerica, various commutation agreements and collections on reinsurance
recoverables, including those related to prior years' hurricane losses.
the
$1.84billion decline in reinsurance recoverables in 2007 primarily reflected significant collections on reinsurance recoverables, including those related to prior years'
hurricane losses, operations in runoff (primarily gulf) and various commutation agreements.
prior year reserve development
the following disclosures regarding reserve development are on a "net of reinsurance" basis.
2008.
in 2008, estimated claims and claim adjustment expenses incurred included $1.73billion of net favorable development for claims
arising in prior years, including $1.54billion of net favorable prior year reserve development impacting the company's results of operations, which excludes $60million of accretion of
discount.
business insurance.net favorable prior year reserve development totaled $1.12billion in 2008, driven by better than expected loss
results
primarily concentrated in the general liability and commercial multi-peril product lines, an increase in anticipated ceded recoveries for older accident years in the general liability product line and
better than anticipated loss development in the commercial property and commercial automobile product lines. the net favorable prior year reserve development in the general liability and commercial
multi-peril lines was attributable to several factors, including improved legal and judicial environments, as well as enhanced risk control, underwriting and claim process initiatives. the commercial
property product line improvement occurred primarily in the 2007 accident year as a result of better than expected development for certain large national property, national programs, and ocean marine
claim exposures and lower than expected weather-related losses during the last half of 2007, as well as favorable development in certain large inland marine claim exposures and in ceded recoveries for
commercial property large claims. in addition, the commercial multi-peril and property product lines' 2005 accident year results experienced improvement due to the litigation environment relating to,
and ongoing claim settlements for, hurricane katrina. the commercial automobile product line improvement was attributable to several factors, including improved legal and judicial environments, as
well as enhanced risk control, underwriting and claim process initiatives. the net favorable prior year reserve development in the foregoing product lines in 2008 was partially offset by net
unfavorable prior year reserve development in the workers' compensation product line, primarily driven by higher than anticipated medical costs related to 2004 and prior accident years, and by a
$70million and $85million increase to asbestos and environmental reserves, respectively.
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
7. insurance claim reserves (continued)
financial, professional& international insurance.net favorable prior year reserve development totaled $274million in
2008, primarily
driven by better than expected loss experience in the international group.
the improvements in longer-tail lines of business were attributable to several factors, including enhanced risk control and underwriting strategies throughout the international group. in
the property line of business, the improvement primarily resulted from better than anticipated loss development in the united kingdom, in part due to favorable claim activity relating to 2007 flood
losses. in the bond& financial products group, better than expected loss experience for the contract surety business within the fidelity and surety product line, resulting from favorable
settlements on large claims (primarily from accident years prior to 2005), resulted in net favorable prior year reserve development in 2008.
personal insurance.net favorable prior year reserve development in 2008 totaled $143million, primarily driven by favorable loss
experience
related to hurricane katrina, and better than expected loss experience from recent accident years for the homeowners and other product line. this improvement was driven in part by claim initiatives as
well as better than expected outcomes on 2007 catastrophe-related claims. in addition, the homeowners and other product line experienced improvement in older accident years for the umbrella line as
well as favorable experience from accident year 2007 for allied coverages due to less than expected claim activity.
2007.
in 2007, estimated claims and claim adjustment expenses incurred included $672million of net favorable development for claims
arising in prior years, including $546million of net favorable prior year reserve development impacting the company's results of operations, which excludes $60million of accretion of
discount.
business insurance.net favorable prior year reserve development totaled $301million in 2007, primarily driven by better than
expected loss
development for recent accident years in the commercial multi-peril, general liability, commercial automobile and property product lines. the commercial multi-peril and general liability product lines
experienced better than anticipated loss development that was attributable to several factors, including improved legal and judicial environments, as well as enhanced risk control, underwriting and
claim process initiatives. the commercial automobile product line experienced better than expected loss development due to more favorable legal and judicial environments, claim handling initiatives
focused on the automobile line of insurance and improvements in auto safety technology. the property product line experienced fewer than expected late reported claims related to
non-catastrophe weather events that occurred late in 2006, as well as better than expected frequency and severity due in part to changes in the marketplace, such as higher deductibles and
lower policy limits. in addition, the property product line experienced better than expected large loss outcomes which were partially attributable to favorable litigation resolutions. net total prior
year development in 2007 included a $185million increase to environmental reserves.
financial, professional& international insurance.net favorable prior year reserve development in 2007 totaled
$93million, primarily
reflecting better than expected loss development in international property, employers' liability, professional indemnity and motor lines of business for recent accident years, which was attributable
to several factors, including enhanced pricing and underwriting strategies throughout the international operations, and the favorable impact of legal and judicial reforms in ireland.
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
7. insurance claim reserves (continued)
personal insurance.net favorable prior year reserve development in 2007 totaled $152million, driven by better than expected
automobile loss
experience due in part to claim initiatives and fewer than expected late reported homeowners' claims related to non-catastrophe weather events that occurred in the fourth quarter of 2006.
in addition, a portion of net favorable prior year reserve development in the homeowners and other line of business in 2007 was attributable to a decrease in the number of claims due to changes in the
marketplace, including higher deductibles and fewer small-dollar claims.
2006.
in 2006, estimated claims and claim adjustment expenses included $429million of net favorable development for claims arising in
prior years, including $394million of net favorable prior year reserve development impacting the company's results of operations which excludes $62million of accretion of discount.
business insurance.net favorable prior year reserve development totaled $21million in 2006, primarily concentrated in the
commercial
multi-peril, general liability, property and commercial automobile lines of business, partially offset by increases for asbestos reserves and environmental reserves (as discussed in more detail in the
following "asbestos and environmental reserves" section), as well as reserve strengthening for assumed reinsurance business in runoff. the commercial multi-peril and liability lines of business
experienced better than anticipated loss development that was attributable to several factors, including improving legal and judicial environments, as well as enhanced risk control, underwriting and
claim process initiatives. the favorable prior year reserve development in the property line of business primarily reflected less "demand surge" inflation than originally estimated for 2005
accident year non-catastrophe related and catastrophe losses. "demand surge" refers to significant short-term increases in building material and labor costs due to a sharp
increase in demand for those materials and services. the commercial automobile line of business experienced better than expected loss development which was attributable to improved legal and judicial
environments, claim handling initiatives focused on the automobile line of insurance and improvements in auto safety technology. the reserve strengthening in assumed reinsurance was primarily due to
changes in projected loss development driven by an unanticipated change in the claim settlement patterns of the underlying casualty exposures.
financial, professional& international insurance.net favorable prior year development in 2006 totaled $14million.
personal insurance.net favorable prior year reserve development in 2006 totaled $359million, driven by better than expected auto
bodily
injury loss experience and a decline in non-catastrophe losses in the homeowners and other line of business, and a reduction in loss estimates for the 2005 hurricanes. in the automobile
line of business, the improvement was partially driven by better than expected results from changes in claim handling practices. these changes included practices which have allowed case reserves to be
established more accurately earlier in the claim settlement process, thereby changing historical loss development patterns. in addition, industry and company initiatives to fight fraud in several
states led to a decrease in the total number of claims and a change in historical loss development patterns. in the homeowners and other line of business, favorable prior year reserve development was
partially driven by a significant decrease in the number of claims, attributable to changes in the marketplace, including higher deductibles and fewer small-dollar claims. these changes also resulted
in a change in historical loss development patterns. in addition, non-catastrophe
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
7. insurance claim reserves (continued)
homeowners
and other loss experience was favorable due to continued evidence of a less than expected impact from "demand surge," which refers to significant short-term increases in
building material and labor costs due to a sharp increase in demand for those materials and services. included in net favorable prior year reserve development in 2006 was a reduction in loss estimates
for catastrophes incurred in 2005, primarily due to lower than expected additional living expense losses related to hurricane katrina.
asbestos and environmental reserves
at december31, 2008 and 2007, the company's claims and claim adjustment expense reserves included $3.33billion and
$4.22billion, respectively, for asbestos and environmental-related claims, net of reinsurance. in december 2008, the company completed the sale of unionamerica, which comprised its united
kingdom-based runoff direct insurance and reinsurance businesses. included in the claims and claim adjustment expense reserves transferred to the purchaser were net asbestos and environmental reserves
of $265million.
it
is difficult to estimate the reserves for asbestos and environmental-related claims due to the vagaries of court coverage decisions, plaintiffs' expanded theories of liability, the
risks inherent in complex litigation and other uncertainties, including without limitation, those which are set forth below.
asbestos reserves.because each policyholder presents different liability and coverage issues, the company generally reviews the
exposure presented
by each policyholder at least annually. in the course of this review, the company generally considers, among other factors: available insurance coverage, including the role of any umbrella or excess
insurance the company has issued to the policyholder; limits and deductibles; an analysis of the policyholder's potential liability; the jurisdictions involved; past and anticipated future claim
activity and loss development on pending claims; past settlement values of similar claims; allocated claim adjustment expense; potential role of other insurance; the role, if any, of
non-asbestos claims or potential non-asbestos claims in any resolution process; and applicable coverage defenses or determinations, if any, including the determination as to
whether or not an asbestos claim is a products/completed operation claim subject to an aggregate limit and the available coverage, if any, for that claim.
in
the third quarter of 2008, the company completed its annual in-depth asbestos claim review. the trends observed over the past three reviews have been generally consistent.
the trends include:
more stable payment trends for a large proportion of policyholders;
a decrease in the number of new claims received;
a decrease in the number of large asbestos exposures confronting the company due to additional settlement activity;
fewer and less volatile asbestos-related bankruptcies; and
the absence of new theories of liability or new classes of defendants.
while
the company believes that these trends indicate a reduction in the volatility associated with the company's overall asbestos exposure, there nonetheless remains a high degree of
uncertainty with respect to future exposure from asbestos claims.
the
home office and field office categories, which account for the vast majority of policyholders with active asbestos-related claims, again experienced an overall reduction in new claim
filings in 2008.
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
7. insurance claim reserves (continued)
the
number of policyholders tendering asbestos claims for the first time was consistent with the number tendering claims in 2007. defense and indemnity costs in these categories remain at similar
levels to what the company has experienced in recent years due to the level of trial activity involving impaired individuals.
on
january29, 2009, the company and ppg industries, inc ("ppg"), along with approximately 30 other insurers of ppg, agreed in principle on a modified settlement agreement to
settle asbestos-related coverage litigation under insurance policies issued to ppg. the tentative settlement agreement has been incorporated into the modified third amended plan of reorganization
("amended plan") proposed as part of the pittsburgh corning corp. ("pcc", which is 50% owned by ppg) bankruptcy proceeding. pursuant to the proposed amended plan, which was filed on january30,
2009, pcc, along with enumerated other companies (including ppg as well as the company as a participating insurer), are to receive protections afforded by section524(g) of the bankruptcy code
from certain asbestos-related bodily injury claims. the company had entered into a prior agreement in principle with ppg in 2002 which was contingent upon final court approval of the second amended
plan of reorganization for pcc, but in december 2006, the united states bankruptcy court declined to confirm that plan of reorganization. as a result of the december 2006 ruling, the company removed
the reserves associated with the prior agreement from the structured settlement category of the asbestos reserve and made a corresponding increase in the unallocated asbestos ibnr reserve. under the
current agreement
in principle, the company has the option to make a series of payments over the next 20years totaling approximately $620million to the trust to be created under the amended plan, or it
may elect to make a one-time discounted payment, which, as of june30, 2009, would total approximately $430million (approximately $400million after reinsurance). the
current agreement in principle with ppg is subject to numerous contingencies, including final court approval of the amended plan, and the company has no obligation to make the settlement payment until
all contingencies are satisfied. the company's obligations under this agreement in principle continue to be included in the unallocated asbestos ibnr reserve.
the
company's quarterly asbestos reserve review includes an analysis of exposure and claim payment patterns by policyholder category, as well as recent settlements, policyholder
bankruptcies, judicial rulings and legislative actions. developing payment trends among policyholders in the home office, field office and assumed and international categories are also analyzed. in
addition, the company reviews its historical gross and net loss and expense paid experience, year-by-year, to assess any emerging trends, fluctuations, or characteristics
suggested by the aggregate paid activity. for certain policyholders an estimate of the gross ultimate exposure for indemnity and related claim adjustment expense is determined, and for those
policyholders the company calculates, by each policy year, a ceded reinsurance projection based on any applicable facultative and treaty reinsurance, past ceded experience and reinsurance collections.
conventional actuarial methods are not utilized to establish asbestos reserves nor have the company's evaluations resulted in any way of determining a meaningful average asbestos defense or indemnity
payment.
net
asbestos losses and expenses paid in 2008 were $658million, compared with $317million in 2007. the increase in net paid losses was the result of the acands payment in
the third quarter of 2008. excluding the acands settlement, payments in 2008 were $293million. approximately 59% and 20% of total net paid losses in 2008 and 2007, respectively, related to
policyholders with whom the company had entered into settlement agreements limiting the company's liability.
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
7. insurance claim reserves (continued)
the
company recorded a $70million pretax increase to asbestos reserves in 2008. the company recorded no asbestos reserve additions in 2007 and recorded a pretax asbestos reserve
addition of $155million in 2006. the 2008 increase was driven by a change in the estimated costs associated with litigating asbestos coverage matters and a change in estimated losses for
certain individual policyholders. the increase was not a result of a change in the company's assessment of the underlying asbestos environment. approximately half of the $155million 2006
pretax reserve adjustment was due to an increase in the projected defense costs for ten policyholders. the majority of the remainder of the reserve adjustment was primarily due to continued litigation
activity against smaller, peripheral defendants.
environmental reserves.in establishing environmental reserves, the company evaluates the exposure presented by each policyholder and
the anticipated
cost of resolution, if any. in the course of this analysis, the company generally considers the probable liability, available coverage, relevant judicial interpretations and historical value of
similar exposures. in addition, the company considers the many variables presented, such as the nature of the alleged activities of the policyholder at each site; the allegations of environmental harm
at each site; the number of sites; the total number of potentially responsible parties at each site; the nature of environmental harm and the corresponding remedy at each site; the nature of
government enforcement activities at each site; the ownership and general use of each site; the overall nature of the insurance relationship between the company and the policyholder, including the
role of any umbrella or excess insurance the company has issued to the policyholder; the involvement of other insurers; the potential for other available coverage, including the number of years of
coverage; the role, if any, of non-environmental claims or potential non-environmental claims in any resolution process; and the applicable law in each jurisdiction.
conventional actuarial techniques are not used to estimate these reserves.
the
company continues to receive notices from policyholders tendering claims for the first time. these policyholders generally present smaller exposures, have fewer sites and are lower
tier defendants. further, in many instances clean-up costs have been reduced because regulatory agencies are willing to accept risk-based site analyses and more efficient
clean-up technologies. however, the company has experienced upward development in the anticipated defense and settlement costs for certain of its pending policyholders. as a result of this
development, the company increased its environmental reserve by $85million in the second quarter of 2008. the company continues to experience a decline in both the number of new policyholders
tendering claims for the first time and the number of pending lawsuits between the company and its policyholders pertaining to coverage for environmental claims; however, the company has experienced a
moderation in the rate of that decline in recent years. the company increased its environmental reserve by $185million in 2007 primarily in response to this development. in 2006, the company
increased environmental reserves by $120million primarily as a result of higher than expected defense and settlement costs driven in part by adverse judicial developments in certain states
regarding the availability of coverage for environmental claims.
asbestos and environmental reserves.as a result of the processes and procedures described above, management believes that the reserves
carried for
asbestos and environmental claims at december31, 2008 are appropriately established based upon known facts, current law and management's judgment. however, the uncertainties surrounding the
final resolution of these claims continue, and it is difficult to determine the ultimate exposure for asbestos and environmental claims and related litigation. as a result, these reserves are subject
to revision as new information becomes available and as claims develop. the continuing uncertainties include, without limitation, the risks and
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
7. insurance claim reserves (continued)
lack
of predictability inherent in complex litigation, any impact from the bankruptcy protection sought by various asbestos producers and other asbestos defendants, a further increase or decrease in
asbestos and environmental claims beyond that which is anticipated, the role of any umbrella or excess policies
the company has issued, the resolution or adjudication of disputes pertaining to the amount of available coverage for asbestos and environmental claims in a manner inconsistent with the company's
previous assessment of these claims, the number and outcome of direct actions against the company, future developments pertaining to the company's ability to recover reinsurance for asbestos and
environmental claims and the unavailability of other insurance sources potentially available to policyholders, whether through exhaustion of policy limits or through the insolvency of other
participating insurers. in addition, uncertainties arise from the insolvency or bankruptcy of policyholders and other defendants, although in recent years the company has noted a decrease in the
number and volatility of asbestos-related bankruptcies. it is also not possible to predict changes in the legal, regulatory and legislative environment and their impact on the future development of
asbestos and environmental claims. this development will be affected by future court and regulatory decisions and interpretations, as well as changes in applicable legislation. it is also difficult to
predict the ultimate outcome of complex coverage disputes until settlement negotiations near completion and significant legal questions are resolved or, failing settlement, until the dispute is
adjudicated. this is particularly the case with policyholders in bankruptcy where negotiations often involve a large number of claimants and other parties and require court approval to be effective.
as part of its continuing analysis of asbestos and environmental reserves, the company continues to study the implications of these and other developments. (also, see
"partiitem3, legal proceedings").
because
of the uncertainties set forth above, additional liabilities may arise for amounts in excess of the current related reserves. in addition, the company's estimate of claims and
claim adjustment expenses may change. these additional liabilities or increases in estimates, or a range of either, cannot now be reasonably estimated and could result in income statement charges that
could be material to the company's operating results in future periods.
catastrophe exposure
the company has geographic exposure to catastrophe losses, which can be caused by various natural and man-made events
including hurricanes, windstorms, tornadoes, earthquakes, hail, severe winter weather, explosions and fires. the incidence and severity of catastrophes are inherently unpredictable. the extent of
losses from a catastrophe is a function of both the total amount of insured exposure in the area affected by the event and the severity of the event. most catastrophes are restricted to small
geographic areas; however, hurricanes and earthquakes may produce significant damage in larger areas, especially those that are heavily populated. the company generally seeks to reduce its exposure to
catastrophes through individual risk selection and the purchase of catastrophe reinsurance.
there
are also risks which impact the estimation of ultimate costs for catastrophes. for example, the estimation of reserves related to hurricanes can be affected by the inability of the
company and its insureds to access portions of the impacted areas, the complexity of factors contributing to the losses, the legal and regulatory uncertainties and the nature of the information
available to establish the reserves. complex factors include, but are not limited to: determining whether damage was caused by flooding versus wind; evaluating general liability and pollution
exposures; estimating additional living expenses; the impact of demand surge; infrastructure disruption; fraud; the effect of mold damage and
business interruption costs; and reinsurance collectibility. the timing of a catastrophe's occurrence, such as at or near the end of a reporting period, can also affect the information available to us
in estimating reserves for that reporting period. the estimates related to catastrophes are adjusted as actual claims emerge.
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
8. debt
debt outstanding was as follows:
(at december31, in millions)
short-term:
commercial paper
$
$
zero coupon convertible notes, effective yield 4.17%, due march3, 2009
7.81% private placement notes due september16, 2009 and 2008
6.38% medium-term notes due december15, 2008
3.75% senior notes due march15, 2008
total short-term debt
long-term:
8.125% senior notes due april15, 2010
7.415% medium-term notes due august23, 2010
7.22% real estate non-recourse debt due september1, 2011
7.81% private placement notes due on various dates through 2011
5.375% senior notes due june15, 2012
5.00% senior notes due march15, 2013
5.50% senior notes due december1, 2015
6.25% senior notes due june20, 2016
5.75% senior notes due december15, 2017
5.80% senior notes due may15, 2018
7.75% senior notes due april15, 2026
7.625% junior subordinated debentures due december15, 2027
6.375% senior notes due march15, 2033
6.75% senior notes due june20, 2036
6.25% senior notes due june15, 2037
8.50% junior subordinated debentures due december15, 2045
8.312% junior subordinated debentures due july1, 2046
6.25% fixed-to-floating rate junior subordinated debentures due march15, 2067
1,000
1,000
zero coupon convertible notes, effective yield 4.17%, due march3, 2009
total long-term debt
5,938
5,574
total debt principal
6,180
6,226
unamortized fair value adjustment
unamortized debt issuance costs
(67
)
(67
)
total debt
$
6,181
$
6,242
2008 debt issuancein may 2008, the company issued $500million aggregate principal amount of 5.80% senior notes that
will mature on may15, 2018. the net proceeds of the issuance, after original issuance discount and the deduction of underwriting expenses and commissions and other expenses, totaled
approximately $496million. interest on the senior notes is payable semi-annually on may15 and november15, commencing november15, 2008. the senior notes are
redeemable in whole at any time or in part from time to time, at the company's option, at a redemption price equal to the greater of (a)100% of the principal amount of senior notes to be
redeemed or (b)the sum of the present
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
8. debt (continued)
values
of the remaining scheduled payments of principal and interest on the senior notes to be redeemed (exclusive of interest accrued to the date of redemption) discounted to the date of redemption
on a semi-annual basis (assuming a 360-day year consisting of twelve 30-day months) at the then current treasury rate plus 30 basis points for the senior notes.
2008 debt maturities.in march 2008, the company's $400million, 3.75% senior notes matured and were fully paid. in
december 2008, medium-term notes with a par value of $149million and an interest rate of 6.38% matured and were fully paid.
2007 debt issuancesin march 2007, the company issued $1billion aggregate principal amount of 6.25%
fixed-to-floating rate junior subordinated debentures due march15, 2067 for net proceeds of $986million (after original issue discount and the deduction of
underwriting expenses and commissions and other expenses). the debentures were issued at a discount, resulting in an effective interest rate of 6.447%. the debentures bear interest at an annual rate
of 6.25% from the date of issuance to, but excluding, march15, 2017, payable semi-annually in arrears on march15 and september15. from and including
march15, 2017, the debentures will bear interest at an annual rate equal to three-month libor plus 2.215%, payable quarterly on march15, june15, september15 and
december15 of each year. the company has the right, on one or more occasions, to defer the payment of interest on the debentures. the company will not be required to settle deferred interest
until it has deferred interest for five consecutive years or, if earlier, made a payment of current interest during a deferral period. the company may defer interest for up to ten consecutive years
without giving rise to an event of default. deferred interest will accumulate additional interest at an annual rate equal to the annual interest rate then applicable to the debentures.
the
debentures carry a 60-year final maturity and a scheduled maturity date in year thirty. during the 180-day period ending not more than 15 and not less than
ten business days prior to the scheduled maturity date, the company is required to use commercially reasonable efforts to sell enough qualifying capital securities, or at its option, common stock,
qualifying warrants, mandatorily convertible preferred stock, debt exchangeable for common equity or debt exchangeable for preferred equity to permit repayment of the debentures at the scheduled
maturity date. if any debentures remain outstanding after the scheduled maturity date, the unpaid amount will remain outstanding until the company has raised sufficient proceeds from the sale of
qualifying capital securities or, at its option, common stock, qualifying warrants, mandatorily convertible preferred stock, debt exchangeable for common equity or debt exchangeable for preferred
equity to permit the repayment in full of the debentures. if there are remaining debentures at the final maturity date, the company is required to redeem the debentures using any source of funds.
qualifying capital securities are securities (other than common stock, qualifying warrants, mandatorily convertible preferred stock, debt exchangeable for common equity, and debt exchangeable for
preferred equity) which generally are treated by the ratings agencies as having similar equity content to the debentures.
the
company can redeem the debentures at its option, in whole or in part, at any time on or after march15, 2017 at a redemption price of 100% of the principal amount being
redeemed plus accrued but unpaid interest. the company can redeem the debentures at its option prior to march15, 2017 (a)in whole at any time or in part from time to time or
(b)in whole, but not in part, in the event of certain tax or rating agency events relating to the debentures, at a redemption price equal to the greater of 100% of the principal amount being
redeemed and the applicable make-whole amount, in each case plus any accrued and unpaid interest.
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
8. debt (continued)
in
connection with the offering of the debentures, the company entered into a "replacement capital covenant" for the benefit of holders of one or more designated series of the company's
indebtedness (which will initially be the 6.750% senior notes due 2036). under the terms of the replacement capital covenant, if the company redeems the debentures at any time prior to
march15, 2047 it can only do so with the proceeds of securities that are treated by the rating agencies as having similar equity content to the debentures.
in
may 2007, the company issued $250million aggregate principal amount of 5.375% senior notes due june15, 2012 (the 2012 senior notes), $450million aggregate
principal amount of 5.750% senior notes due december15, 2017 (the 2017 senior notes), and $800million aggregate principal amount of 6.250% senior notes due june15, 2037 (the
2037 senior notes). the total net proceeds of these three senior note issuances, after original issuance discounts and the deduction of underwriting expenses and commissions and other expenses, were
approximately $1.47billion. interest on each of the senior note issuances is payable semi-annually on june15 and december15, commencing december15, 2007.
each series of senior notes is redeemable in whole at any time or in part from time to time, at the company's option, at a redemption price equal to the greater of (a)100% of the
principal amount of senior notes to be redeemed, or (b)the sum of the present values of the remaining scheduled payments of principal and interest on the senior notes to be redeemed (exclusive
of interest accrued to the date of redemption) discounted to the date of redemption on a semi-annual basis (assuming a 360-day year consisting of twelve 30-day
months) at the then current treasury rate plus 12.5 basis points for the 2012 senior notes, 15 basis points for the 2017 senior notes and 20 basis points for the 2037 senior notes. the company applied
a portion of the net proceeds of this offering to repay approximately $442million of senior notes maturing on august16, 2007 and to repay approximately $42million of
medium-term notes maturing in the third quarter of 2007. the remaining proceeds will be used for general corporate purposes. prior to applying these proceeds, the company invested them in
investment grade, marketable securities.
2007 debt redemptions and maturitiesin january 2007, the company redeemed $81million of 8.47% subordinated debentures
originally issued in 1997 and due january10, 2027. the debentures were redeemable by the company on or after january10, 2007. in january 1997, usf&g capital ii, a business trust,
issued $100million of capital securities, the proceeds of which, along with $3million in capital provided by the company, were used to purchase the subordinated debentures issued by
usf&g corporation and subsequently assumed by the company after the merger of the st.paul companiesinc. (spc) and travelers property casualty corp. (tpc). during the period prior to
redemption, the company had repurchased and retired $22million of the debentures in open market transactions. upon the company's redemption of the remaining $81million of subordinated
debentures in january 2007, usf&g capital ii in turn used the proceeds to redeem its remaining capital securities outstanding. usf&g capital ii was then liquidated, and the company received a
$3million distribution of capital. the company recorded a $3million pretax gain on the redemption of the subordinated debentures, due to the remaining unamortized fair value adjustment
recorded at the merger date, less the redemption premium paid.
in
march 2007, the company's $500million, 5.75% senior notes matured and were fully paid.
in
april 2007, the company completed the redemption of its outstanding $893million, 4.50% convertible junior subordinated notes due in 2032 (the notes). the notes were originally
issued by tpc, and the company assumed certain obligations relating to the notes pursuant to a second supplemental
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
8. debt (continued)
indenture
dated april1, 2004. each note had a principal amount of $25.00. the redemption price for each note was $25.5625 plus $0.009375 of accrued and unpaid interest. any note called for
redemption could be surrendered for conversion into common stock before the close of business on april17, 2007. each note was convertible into 0.4684 shares of common stock of the travelers
companies,inc. holders of $36million of the notes tendered their certificates in exchange for the issuance of 670,910 of the company's common shares. the remaining $857million
of notes were redeemed for cash, along with accrued interest to the date of redemption. the company recorded a $39million pretax loss ($25million after-tax) in other
revenues in the second quarter of 2007 related to the redemption, consisting of the redemption premium paid and the write-off of remaining unamortized issuance costs.
in
august 2007, the company's $442million, 5.01% senior notes matured and were fully paid.
in
2007, medium-term notes with a cumulative par value of $72million and interest rates ranging from 6.85% to 7.37% matured and were fully paid.
description of debt
commercial paperthe company maintains an $800million commercial
paper program with $1billion of back-up liquidity, consisting entirely of a bank credit agreement. interest rates on commercial paper issued in 2008 ranged from 0.5% to 4.6%, and
in 2007 ranged from 4.7% to 5.7%.
medium-term notesthe medium-term notes outstanding at december31, 2008 bear an interest rate
of 7.415% and mature in 2010. during 2008 and 2007, medium-term notes having a par value of $149million and $72million, respectively, matured.
senior notesthe company's various senior debt issues are unsecured obligations that rank equally with one another. interest
payments are made semi-annually. the company generally may redeem some or all of the notes prior to maturity in accordance with terms unique to each debt instrument.
zero coupon convertible notesthe zero coupon convertible notes mature in march 2009, but are redeemable at the option of the
company for an amount equal to the original issue price plus accreted original issue discount. each note is convertible at the option of the holder at any time on or prior to maturity, unless
previously redeemed by the company, into common stock of the company at a conversion rate of 16.6433 shares for each $1,000 principal amount of notes. if all notes outstanding at december31,
2008 were converted, the company would issue 2.4million of its common shares.
junior subordinated debenturesthe company's $1billion aggregate principal amount of 6.25%
fixed-to-floating rate junior subordinated debentures are described in the "2007 debt issuances" section above. the company's other three junior subordinated debenture
instruments are all similar in nature. three separate business trusts issued preferred securities to investors and used the proceeds to purchase the company's subordinated debentures. interest on each
of the instruments is paid semi-annually.
the
company's consolidated balance sheet includes the debt instruments acquired in the merger, which were recorded at fair value as of the acquisition date. the resulting fair value
adjustment is being amortized over the remaining life of the respective debt instruments using the effective-interest method. the amortization of the fair value adjustment reduced interest expense by
$15million and $19million for the years ended december31, 2008 and 2007, respectively.
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
8. debt (continued)
the
following table presents merger-related unamortized fair value adjustments and the related effective interest rate:
unamortized fair value purchase adjustment at december31,
effective
interest rate
to maturity
(in millions)
issue rate
maturity date
senior notes
8.125
%
apr. 2010
$
$
4.257
%
medium-term notes
7.415
%
aug. 2010
3.310
%
subordinated debentures
7.625
%
dec. 2027
6.147
%
8.500
%
dec. 2045
6.362
%
8.312
%
jul. 2046
6.362
%
total
$
$
on
april1, 2004, the travelers companies,inc. fully and unconditionally guaranteed the payment of all principal, premiums, if any, and interest on certain debt
obligations of its subsidiaries tpc and travelers insurance group holdingsinc. (tighi). the guarantees pertain to the $500million 5.00% notes due 2013, the $200million 7.75%
notes due 2026 and the $500million 6.375% notes due 2033.
maturitiesthe amount of debt obligations, other than commercial paper, that become due in each of the next five years is as
follows: 2009, $143million; 2010, $273million; 2011, $11million; 2012, $250million; and 2013, $500million.
line of credit agreement
on june10, 2005, the company entered into a $1.0billion, five-year revolving credit agreement with a
syndicate of financial institutions. pursuant to covenants in the credit agreement, the company must maintain an excess of consolidated net worth over goodwill and other intangible assets of not less
than $10billion at all times. the company must also maintain a ratio of total consolidated debt to the sum of total consolidated debt plus consolidated net worth of not greater than 0.40 to
1.00. in addition, the credit agreement contains other customary restrictive covenants as well as certain customary events of default, including with respect to a change in control. at
december31, 2008, the company was in compliance with these covenants and all other covenants related to its outstanding debt instruments. there was no amount outstanding under the credit
agreement as of december31, 2008 or 2007.
shelf registration
in december 2008, the company filed with the securities and exchange commission a universal shelf registration statement for the
potential offering and sale of securities to replace its expiring universal shelf registration statement. the company may offer these securities from time to time at prices and on other terms to be
determined at the time of offering. during 2008 and 2007, the company issued securities with principal amounts of $500million and $2.50billion, respectively, (as described above) under
the prior shelf registration statement.
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
9. shareholders' equity and dividend availability
preferred stock
the company's preferred shareholders' equity represents the par value of preferred shares outstanding that the company assumed in the
merger related to the st.paul companies,inc. stock ownership plan (sop) trust which was subsequently merged into the travelers 401(k) savings plan (the 401(k) savings plan). the sop
trust may at any time convert any or all of the preferred shares into shares of the company's common stock at a rate of eight shares of common stock for each preferred share. the board of directors
has reserved a sufficient number of authorized common shares to satisfy the conversion of all preferred shares issued to the sop trust and the redemption of preferred shares to meet employee
distribution requirements. upon the redemption of preferred shares, the company will issue shares of common stock to the trust to fulfill the redemption obligations. see note13. holders of the
preferred stock have a preference upon liquidation, dissolution or winding up of the company of $100 per share.
common stock
the company is governed by the minnesota business corporation act. all authorized shares of voting common stock have no par value.
shares of common stock reacquired are considered authorized and unissued shares. the number of authorized shares of the company is 1.75billion. the articles of incorporation allow the company
to issue five million undesignated shares. the board of directors may designate the type of shares and set the terms thereof. the board designated 1,450,000 shares as seriesb convertible
preferred stock in connection with the 401(k) savings plan.
treasury stock
in may 2006, the company's board of directors authorized the repurchase of up to $2billion of shares of the company's common
stock. in january 2007, the board of directors authorized an additional $3billion of share repurchase capacity. in january 2008, the company's board of directors approved a $5billion
increase to the share repurchase authorization. under these authorizations, repurchases may be made from time to time in the open market, pursuant to preset trading plans meeting the requirements of
rule10b5-1 under the securities exchange act of 1934, in private transactions or otherwise. the authorizations do not have a stated expiration date. the timing and actual number of
shares to be repurchased in the future will depend on a variety of factors, including corporate and regulatory requirements, price, catastrophe losses and other market conditions. the following table
summarizes repurchase activity in 2008 and remaining repurchase capacity at december31, 2008.
quarterly period ending
number of
shares
purchased
cost of shares
repurchased
average price paid
per share
remaining capacity
under share repurchase
authorization
march31, 2008
20,831,251
$
1,000,332,704
$
48.02
$
4,931,853,967
june30, 2008
15,287,182
750,014,344
49.06
4,181,839,623
september30, 2008
6,197,529
271,984,984
43.89
3,909,854,639
december31, 2008
2,712,550
99,997,100
36.86
3,809,857,539
total
45,028,512
$
2,122,329,132
$
47.13
$
3,809,857,539
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
9. shareholders' equity and dividend availability (continued)
since
the inception of the authorization in may 2006 through december31, 2008, the company has repurchased a cumulative total of 123.9million shares for a total cost of
$6.19billion, or $49.98 per share.
the
company's amended and restated 2004 stock incentive plan, the legacy spc 1994 stock incentives plan and the legacy tpc 2002 incentive plan provide settlement alternatives to
employees in which the company repurchases shares to cover tax withholding costs and exercise costs. during the years ended december31, 2008 and 2007, the company purchased $38million
and $90million, respectively, of its common stock under these plans.
common
shares acquired are reported as treasury stock in the consolidated balance sheet.
dividend availability
the company's insurance subsidiaries are subject to various regulatory restrictions that limit the maximum amount of dividends
available to be paid to their parent without prior approval of insurance regulatory authorities. a maximum of $3.07billion is available in 2009 for such dividends without prior approval of the
connecticut insurance department for connecticut-domiciled subsidiaries and the minnesota department of commerce for minnesota-domiciled subsidiaries. the holding company received $3.70billion
of dividends from its domestic insurance subsidiaries in 2008.
statutory net income and surplus
statutory net income of the company's insurance subsidiaries was $4.10billion, $4.86billion, and $4.27billion
for the years ended december31, 2008, 2007 and 2006, respectively. statutory capital and surplus of the company's insurance subsidiaries was $21.49billion and $22.88billion at
december31, 2008 and 2007, respectively.
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
9. shareholders' equity and dividend availability (continued)
accumulated other changes in equity from nonowner sources, net of tax
changes in each component of accumulated other changes in equity from nonowner sources were as follows:
(at and for the year ended december31, in millions)
net unrealized
gains (losses)
on investment
securities
net benefit plan
assets and
obligations
recognized in
equity(1)
other(2)
accumulated
other changes
in equity from
nonowner
sources
balance, december31, 2005
$
$
(14
)
$
$
net change in unrealized gains on investment securities, net of tax expense of $81
less: reclassification adjustment for net realized gains included in net income, net of tax benefit of $(11)
(20
)
(20
)
adjustment to initially apply fas158, net of tax benefit of $(43)
(80
)
(80
)
change in other, net of tax benefit of $(5)
current period change
(80
)
balance, december31, 2006
(94
)
net change in unrealized gains on investment securities, net of tax expense of $151
less: reclassification adjustment for net realized gains included in net income, net of tax benefit of $(60)
(113
)
(113
)
net change in benefit plan assets and obligations recognized in equity, net of tax benefit of $(30)
(50
)
(50
)
change in other, net of tax expense of $30
current period change
(50
)
balance, december31, 2007
(144
)
net change in unrealized gains on investment securities, net of tax benefit of $(584)
(1,056
)
(1,056
)
less: reclassification adjustment for net realized gains included in net income, net of tax expense of $157
net change in benefit plan assets and obligations recognized in equity, net of tax benefit of $(212)
(405
)
(405
)
change in other, net of tax benefit of $(47)
(401
)
(401
)
current period change
(764
)
(405
)
(401
)
(1,570
)
balance, december31, 2008
$
(144
)
$
(549
)
$
(207
)
$
(900
)
(1)activity
in 2006 represented the adjustment to initially apply the provisions of fas158. activity in 2008 and 2007 represented net changes in assets
and obligations related to the company's employee benefit plans recognized in equity from nonowner sources.
(2)includes
foreign currency translation adjustments and hedging activities. activity in 2008 primarily represented foreign currency translation adjustments.
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
10. earnings per share
basic eps was computed by dividing income available to common shareholders by the weighted average number of common shares outstanding during the period. the computation of diluted eps
reflected the effect of potentially dilutive securities.
the
following is a reconciliation of the income and share data used in the basic and diluted earnings per share computations:
(for the year ended december31, in millions, except per share amounts)
basic
net income, as reported
$
2,924
$
4,601
$
4,208
preferred stock dividends, net of taxes
(4
)
(4
)
(5
)
net income available to common shareholdersbasic
$
2,920
$
4,597
$
4,203
diluted
net income available to common shareholders
$
2,920
$
4,597
$
4,203
effect of dilutive securities:
convertible preferred stock
zero coupon convertible notes
convertible junior subordinated notes(1)
net income available to common shareholdersdiluted
$
2,928
$
4,613
$
4,238
common shares
basic
weighted average shares outstanding
596.4
652.7
687.1
diluted
weighted average shares outstanding
596.4
652.7
687.1
weighted average effects of dilutive securities:
stock options and other incentive plans
6.1
9.4
7.1
convertible preferred stock
2.4
2.9
3.4
zero coupon convertible notes
2.4
2.4
2.4
convertible junior subordinated notes(1)
4.9
16.7
total
607.3
672.3
716.7
net income per common share
basic
$
4.90
$
7.04
$
6.12
diluted
$
4.82
$
6.86
$
5.91
(1)redeemed
in april 2007. see note8.
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
11. income taxes
(for the year ended december31, in millions)
composition of income tax expense (benefit) included in consolidated statement of income
current expense:
federal
$
$
1,279
$
foreign
state
total current tax expense
1,385
1,016
deferred expense (benefit):
federal
(58
)
foreign
(20
)
state
total deferred tax expense (benefit)
(49
)
total income tax expense included in consolidated statement of income
1,615
1,517
composition of income tax included in common shareholders' equity
expense (benefit) relating to stock-based compensation, the change in unrealized appreciation on investments, unrealized loss on foreign exchange and
unrealized loss on derivatives, and other comprehensive income
(701
)
(7
)
total income tax expense included in consolidated financial statements
$
$
1,662
$
1,510
effective tax rate
income before federal, foreign and state income taxes
$
3,716
$
6,216
$
5,725
statutory tax rate
%
%
%
expected federal income tax expense
1,301
2,176
2,004
tax effect of:
nontaxable investment income
(480
)
(465
)
(421
)
other, net
(29
)
(96
)
(66
)
total income tax expense
$
$
1,615
$
1,517
effective tax rate
%
%
%
the
current income tax payable was $145million and $176million at december31, 2008 and 2007, respectively, and is included in other liabilities in the
consolidated balance sheet.
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
11. income taxes (continued)
the
net deferred tax asset comprises the tax effects of temporary differences related to the following assets and liabilities:
(at december31, in millions)
deferred tax assets
claims and claim adjustment expense reserves
$
1,217
$
1,352
unearned premium reserves
investments
other
total gross deferred tax assets
2,754
2,713
less valuation allowance
net deferred tax assets
2,754
2,677
deferred tax liabilities
deferred acquisition costs
investments
internally-developed software
other
total gross deferred tax liabilities
1,470
total deferred income taxes
$
1,965
$
1,207
if
the company determines that any of its deferred tax assets will not result in future tax benefits, a valuation allowance must be established for the portion of these assets that are
not expected to be realized. the net decreases in the valuation allowance for deferred tax assets were $36million and $46million at december31, 2008 and 2007, respectively,
relating in each year to foreign operations. based upon a review of the company's anticipated future taxable income, and also including all other available evidence, both positive and negative, the
company's management concluded that it is more likely than not that the net deferred tax assets will be realized.
for
tax return purposes, as of december31, 2008, the company had net operating loss (nol) carryforwards on a regular tax basis and an alternative minimum tax (amt) basis of
approximately $81million and $47million, respectively. these nol carryforwards expire, if unused, in 2017 and 2018. the amount and timing of realizing the benefit of nol carryforwards
depends on future taxable income and limitations imposed by tax laws. the benefit of the nol carryforward has been recognized in the consolidated financial statements.
u.s.
income taxes have not been provided on $317million of the company's foreign operations' undistributed earnings as of december31, 2008, as such earnings are intended
to be permanently reinvested in those operations. furthermore, any taxes paid to foreign governments on these earnings may be used as credits against the u.s. tax on any dividend distributions from
such earnings.
the
company adopted the provisions of fasb interpretation no.48, accounting for uncertainty in income taxes, on january1,
2007. the adoption of fin48 did not have a material effect on the
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
11. income taxes (continued)
company's
financial position. a reconciliation of the beginning and ending amount of unrecognized tax benefits is as follows:
(in millions)
balance at january1
$
$
additions for tax positions of prior years
reductions for tax positions of prior years
(30
)
(172
)
additions based on tax positions related to current year
reductions based on tax positions related to current year
(10
)
(49
)
balance at december31
$
$
included
in the balances at december31, 2008 and 2007 were $17million and $42million, respectively, of unrecognized tax benefits that, if recognized, would affect
the annual effective tax rate. also included in the balances at those dates were $93million and $101million, respectively, of tax positions for which the ultimate deductibility is
certain, but for which there is uncertainty about the timing of deductibility. the timing of such deductibility would not affect the annual effective tax rate.
the
company recognizes accrued interest and penalties, if any, related to unrecognized tax benefits in income taxes. during the years ended december31, 2008 and 2007, the company
recognized approximately $93million and $9million in interest, respectively. the company had approximately $119million and $26million for the payment of interest
accrued at december31, 2008 and 2007, respectively.
as
of december31, 2007, the company effectively settled internal revenue service (irs) tax examinations for all years through december31, 2004. as a result, the company
recorded after-tax benefits of $86million in its consolidated statement of income for the year ended december31, 2007. in addition, $63million of previously
unrecognized tax benefits related to the irs settlement were recognized through a reduction of goodwill in 2007.
the
irs is conducting an examination of the company's u.s. income tax returns for 2005 through 2006. the company does not expect any significant changes to its liability for unrecognized
tax benefits during the next twelve months.
12. share-based incentive compensation
the company has a share-based incentive compensation plan, the travelers companies,inc. amended and restated 2004 stock incentive plan (the 2004 incentive plan), which replaced
prior share-based incentive compensation plans (legacy plans). the purposes of the 2004 incentive plan are to align the interests of the company's non-employee directors, executive
officers and other employees with those of the company's shareholders, and to attract and retain personnel by providing incentives in the form of stock-based awards. the 2004 incentive plan permits
grants of nonqualified
stock options, incentive stock options, stock appreciation rights, restricted stock, restricted stock units, deferred stock, deferred stock units, performance awards and other stock-based or
stock-denominated awards with respect to the company's common stock. the number of shares of the company's common stock authorized for grant under the 2004 incentive plan is 35million shares,
subject to additional shares that may be available for awards as described below. the company has a policy of issuing new shares to settle the exercise of stock option awards and the vesting of other
equity awards.
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
12. share-based incentive compensation (continued)
in
connection with the adoption of the 2004 incentive plan, legacy share-based incentive compensation plans were terminated. outstanding grants were not affected by the termination of
these legacy plans, including the grant of reload options related to prior option grants under the legacy plans.
the
2004 incentive plan is the only plan pursuant to which future stock-based awards may be granted. in addition to the 35million shares initially authorized for issuance under
the 2004 incentive plan, the following will not be counted towards the 35million shares available and will be available for future grants under the 2004 incentive plan: (i)shares of
common stock subject to an award that expires unexercised, that is forfeited, terminated or canceled, that is settled in cash or other forms of property, or otherwise does not result in the issuance
of shares of common stock, in whole or in part; (ii)shares that are used to pay the exercise price of stock options and shares used to pay withholding taxes on awards generally; and
(iii)shares purchased by the company on the open market using cash option exercise proceeds; provided, however, that the increase in the number of shares of common stock available for grant
pursuant to such market purchases shall not be greater than the number that could be repurchased at fair market value on the date of exercise of the stock option giving rise to such option proceeds.
these provisions also apply to awards granted under the legacy share-based incentive compensation plans that were outstanding on the effective date of the 2004 incentive plan.
the
company also has a compensation program for non-employee directors (the director compensation program). under the director compensation program, non-employee directors' compensation
consists of an annual retainer, a deferred stock award, committee chair fees and a lead director fee. each non-employee director may choose to receive all or a portion of his or her annual retainer in
the form of cash or deferred stock units which vest upon grant. the annual deferred stock awards vest in full on the date of the one-year anniversary of the annual meeting of shareholders of the
company occurring in the year of the award, subject to continued service. any of the deferred stock awards may accumulate, including reinvestment dividends, until distribution either in a lump sum six
months after termination of service as a director or, if the director so elects, in annual installments beginning at least six months following termination of service as a director. the shares of
deferred stock units issued under the director compensation program are awarded under the 2004 incentive plan.
stock option awards
stock option awards granted to eligible officers and key employees have a ten-year term. prior to january1, 2007,
stock options were granted with an exercise price equal to the fair market value of the company's common stock on the day preceding the date of grant. beginning january1, 2007, all stock
options are granted with an exercise price equal to the closing price of the company's common stock on the date of grant. the stock options granted generally vest upon meeting certain years of service
criteria. except as the compensation committee of the board may allow in the future, stock options cannot be sold or transferred by the participant. the vesting terms for stock options granted under
the 2004 incentive plan and legacy plans are generally as follows:
period option granted
option award vesting terms
2008, 2007 and 2006
options vest at end of 3-year period (cliff vest)
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
12. share-based incentive compensation (continued)
period option granted
option award vesting terms
april 2004 through 2005
options vest over 4-year period, 50% on 2ndanniversary of the date of grant, and 25% of the option shares vest on each of the
3rdand 4thanniversaries of the grant date. certain 2005 special option shares vest 50% on each of the 4thand 5thanniversaries of the grant date.
prior to april 2004
options vest over 4-year period, 25% each year on the anniversary of the grant date; or options vest over 5-year period, 20% each
year on the anniversary of the grant date.
in
addition to the stock option awards described above, certain stock option awards that were granted under legacy plans permit an employee exercising an option to be granted a new
option (a reload option) at an exercise price equal to the closing price of the company's common stock on the date on
which the original option is exercised. the reload option is permitted on certain stock option awards granted prior to january 2003 at an amount equal to the number of shares of the common stock used
to satisfy both the exercise price and withholding taxes due upon exercise of an option and vest either six months or one year after the grant date and are exercisable for the remaining term of the
related original option.
the
fair value of each option award is estimated on the date of grant by application of a variation of the black-scholes option pricing model using the assumptions noted in the following
table. the expected term of newly granted stock options is the time to vest plus half the remaining time to expiration. this considers the vesting restriction and represents an even pattern of
exercise behavior over the remaining term. reload options are exercisable for the remaining term of the original option and therefore would generally have a shorter expected term. the expected
volatility is based on the average historical volatility of the common stock of an industry peer group of entities, due to the limited company stock history, over the estimated option term based on
the mid-month of the option grant. the expected dividend is based upon the company's current quarter dividend annualized and assumed to be constant over the expected option term. the
risk-free interest rate for each option is the interpolated market yield for the mid-month of the option grant on a u.s. treasury bill with a term comparable to the expected
option term of the granted stock option. shares received through option exercises under the reload program are subject to restriction on sale. a 10% discount, as measured by the estimated cost of
protecting against changes in market value, has been applied to the fair value of reload options granted to reflect these sales restrictions. the following assumptions were used in estimating the fair
value of options on grant date for the years ended december31, 2008, 2007 and 2006:
original grants
reload grants
expected term of stock options
6 - 7years
1 - 3years
expected volatility of the company's stock
22.8% - 29.9%
19.1% - 31.4%
weighted average volatility
23.1%
23.9%
expected annual dividend per share
$1.16 - $1.20
$1.16 - $1.20
risk-free rate
2.61% - 3.75%
1.36% - 3.42%
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
12. share-based incentive compensation (continued)
original grants
reload grants
expected term of stock options
6 - 7years
1 - 3years
expected volatility of the company's stock
22.5% - 26.9%
14.3% - 19.7%
weighted average volatility
24.9%
16.5%
expected annual dividend per share
$1.04 - $1.16
$1.04 - $1.16
risk-free rate
3.79% - 5.10%
3.34% - 5.06%
original grants
reload grants
expected term of stock options
5 - 7years
1 - 4years
expected volatility of the company's stock
22.6% - 32.0%
15.9% - 30.4%
weighted average volatility
30.3%
18.0%
expected annual dividend per share
$0.92 - $1.04
$0.92 - $1.04
risk-free rate
4.30% - 5.10%
4.30% - 5.17%
a
summary of stock option activity under the company's 2004 incentive plan and legacy share-based incentive compensation plans as of and for the year ended december31, 2008 is as
follows:
stock options
number
weighted
average
exercise
price
weighted
average
contractual
life
remaining
aggregate
intrinsic
value
($ in millions)
outstanding, beginning of year
34,499,327
$
44.33
granted:
original
2,767,362
47.06
reload
143,117
49.68
exercised
(2,543,757
)
33.81
forfeited or expired
(2,066,276
)
51.04
outstanding, end of year
32,799,773
$
44.97
4.3years
$
vested at end of year(1)
27,213,550
$
44.97
3.6years
$
exercisable at end of year
24,314,011
$
44.76
3.1years
$
(1)represents
awards for which the requisite service has been rendered including those that are retirement eligible.
the
following table presents additional information regarding original and reload grants for the years ended december31, 2008, 2007 and 2006.
original grants
reload grants
weighted average grant-date fair value of options granted (pershare)
$
9.56
$
5.80
total intrinsic value of options exercised during the year (inmillions)
$
$
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
12. share-based incentive compensation (continued)
original grants
reload grants
weighted average grant-date fair value of options granted (pershare)
$
14.36
$
5.31
total intrinsic value of options exercised during the year (inmillions)
$
$
original grants
reload grants
weighted average grant-date fair value of options granted (pershare)
$
13.60
$
4.94
total intrinsic value of options exercised during the year (inmillions)
$
$
restricted stock, restricted stock units, deferred stock and performance share award programs
the company, commencing with equity grants on or after january1, 2007, issues restricted stock unit awards to eligible officers
and key employees under the equity awards program established pursuant to the 2004 incentive plan. a restricted stock unit represents the right to receive a share of common stock. these restricted
stock unit awards are granted at market price, generally vest three years from the date of grant, do not have voting rights and the underlying shares of common stock are not issued until the vesting
criteria is satisfied. previously equity awards were granted under the capital accumulation program (cap) which was discontinued following the issuance of cap awards in february 2006. awards issued
under cap were in the form of restricted stock and the number of shares included in the restricted stock award was calculated at a 10% discount from the market price on the date of the award and
generally vested in full after a two-year period from the date of grant. during the vesting period, the stock generally could not be sold or transferred by the participant, who was
required to render service to the company during the restricted period.
the
company also has a performance share awards program pursuant to the 2004 incentive plan which became effective beginning in 2006. under the program, the company may issue performance
share awards to certain employees of the company who hold positions of vice president (or its equivalent) or above. the performance awards represent shares that provide the recipient the right to earn
shares of the company's common stock based upon the company's attainment of certain performance goals. the performance goals for performance awards are based on the company's adjusted return on equity
over a three-year performance period. vesting of any performance shares is contingent upon the company attaining the relevant performance period minimum threshold return on equity. if the
performance period return on equity is below the minimum threshold, none of the shares will vest; if performance meets or exceeds the minimum performance threshold, between 50%-160% of the
performance shares will vest, depending on the actual return on equity attained.
the
fair value of restricted stock units, deferred stock and performance shares is measured at the market price of the company stock at date of grant.
the
total fair value of shares that vested during the years ended december31, 2008, 2007 and 2006 was $82million, $99million and $59million, respectively.
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
12. share-based incentive compensation (continued)
a
summary of restricted stock units, deferred stock awards and performance share activity under the company's 2004 incentive plan and legacy plans as of and for the year ended
december31, 2008 is as follows:
restricted and deferred shares
performance shares
other equity instruments
number
weighted average
grant-date
fair value
number
weighted average
grant-date
fair value
outstanding, beginning of year
3,590,164
$
44.45
1,252,451
$
49.12
granted
1,315,106
47.20
788,677
47.31
vested(1)
(1,410,764
)
39.94
(579,510
)
44.80
forfeited
(143,552
)
46.72
(37,909
)
48.87
performance-based adjustment(2)
26,319
49.78
outstanding, end of year
3,350,954
$
47.33
1,450,028
$
49.87
(1)represents
awards for which the requisite service has been rendered including those that are retirement eligible. excludes performance shares which remain
subject to attainment of a performance condition.
(2)represents
the current year change in estimated performance shares from the initial grant, for grant years 2008, 2007 and 2006, to reflect the attainment of
certain performance levels during the performance measurement period.
on
february3, 2009, the company, under the travelers companies,inc. amended and restated 2004 stock incentive plan, granted 2,370,043 common stock awards in the form of
restricted stock units, deferred stock and performance share awards to participating officers, non-employee directors and other key employees. the restricted stock units and deferred stock
awards totaled 1,437,922 shares while the performance share awards totaled 932,121 shares. the fair value per share attributable to the common stock awards on the date of grant was $39.19.
share-based compensation recognition
the compensation cost for awards subject to a service condition is based upon the number of equity instruments for which the requisite
service period is expected to be rendered. awards granted to retiree-eligible or to employees who become retiree-eligible before an award's vesting date are considered to have met the requisite
service condition. the compensation cost for awards subject to a performance condition is based upon the probable outcome of the performance condition. the compensation cost reflects an estimated
annual forfeiture rate of 5% over the requisite service period of the awards. that estimate is revised if subsequent information indicates that the actual number of instruments expected to vest is
likely to differ from previous estimates. compensation costs for awards are recognized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period. for awards that have a graded vesting
schedule, the compensation cost is recognized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period for each separate vesting portion of the award as if the award was, in substance,
multiple awards. the total compensation cost for all share-based incentive compensation awards recognized in earnings for the years ended december31, 2008, 2007 and 2006 was
$123million, $125million and $147million, respectively. included in those amounts were approximately $2million, $6million and
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
12. share-based incentive compensation (continued)
$12million
respectively, of compensation costs related to awards granted, prior to the adoption of fas123r, to retiree-eligible employees or to employees who became retiree-eligible
before the awards vesting date. also included are compensation cost adjustments of $6million, $5million and $2million, for the years ended december31, 2008, 2007 and
2006, respectively, that reflected the cost associated with the updated estimate of performance shares due to attaining certain performance levels from the
date of the initial grant of the performance awards. the related tax benefits recognized in earnings were $42million for the each of the years ended december31, 2008 and 2007 and
$51million for the year ended december31, 2006.
as
of december31, 2008, there was $112million of total unrecognized compensation cost related to all nonvested share-based incentive compensation awards. this includes
stock options, restricted stock, restricted stock units, deferred stock and performance shares granted under the company's 2004 incentive plan and legacy tpc and legacy spc share-based incentive
compensation plans. the unrecognized compensation cost is expected to be recognized over a weighted-average period of 1.7years.
cash
received from the exercise of employee stock options under share-based compensation plans totaled $89million and $218million in 2008 and 2007, respectively. the tax
benefit realized for tax deductions from employee stock options exercised during 2008 and 2007 totaled $12million and $32million, respectively.
13. pension plans, retirement benefits and savings plans
the company sponsors a qualified non-contributory defined benefit pension plan, which covers substantially all employees and provides benefits under a cash balance formula,
except that employees satisfying certain age and service requirements remain covered by a prior final average pay formula. in addition, the company and tpc sponsor nonqualified defined benefit pension
plans which cover certain highly-compensated employees and also sponsor postretirement health and life insurance benefit plans for employees satisfying certain age and service requirements and for
certain retirees.
as
discussed in note1, the company adopted the provisions of fas158, employers' accounting for defined benefit pension and other postretirement
plans, an amendment of fasb statements no.87, 88, 106 and 132(r) at december31, 2006.
the
incremental effects of applying fas158 on individual line items of the company's balance sheet at december31, 2006 were as follows:
(in millions)
before
application of
fas158
adjustments
after
application of
fas158
deferred tax asset
$
1,493
$
$
1,536
other assets
2,742
(155
)
2,587
total assets
113,873
(112
)
113,761
other liabilities
6,674
(32
)
6,642
total liabilities
88,658
(32
)
88,626
accumulated other changes in equity from nonowner sources
(80
)
total shareholders' equity
25,215
(80
)
25,135
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
13. pension plans, retirement benefits and savings plans (continued)
obligations and funded status
the following tables summarize the funded status, obligations and amounts recognized in the consolidated balance sheet for the
company's benefit plans. the company uses a december31 measurement date for its pension and postretirement benefit plans.
qualified domestic plan
nonqualified and foreign plans
total
(for the year ended december31, in millions)
change in projected benefit obligation
benefit obligation at beginning of year
$
1,841
$
1,752
$
$
$
2,023
$
1,944
benefits earned
interest cost on benefit obligation
actuarial loss (gain)
(8
)
(18
)
(1
)
(26
)
benefits paid
(107
)
(105
)
(13
)
(16
)
(120
)
(121
)
divestiture
(8
)
(9
)
(17
)
foreign currency exchange rate change
(27
)
(27
)
benefit obligation at end of year
$
1,907
$
1,841
$
$
$
2,044
$
2,023
change in plan assets
fair value of plan assets at beginning of year
$
1,870
$
1,884
$
$
$
1,975
$
1,987
actual return on plan assets
(455
)
(18
)
(473
)
company contributions
benefits paid
(107
)
(105
)
(13
)
(16
)
(120
)
(121
)
asset transferdivestiture
(8
)
(4
)
(12
)
foreign currency exchange rate change
(24
)
(24
)
fair value of plan assets at end of year
1,758
1,870
1,818
1,975
funded status of plan at end of year
$
(149
)
$
$
(77
)
$
(77
)
$
(226
)
$
(48
)
amounts recognized in the statement of financial position consist of:
accrued over-funded benefit plan assets
$
$
$
$
$
$
accrued under-funded benefit plan liabilities
(149
)
(79
)
(86
)
(228
)
(86
)
total
$
(149
)
$
$
(77
)
$
(77
)
$
(226
)
$
(48
)
amounts recognized in accumulated other changes in equity from nonowner sources consist of:
prior service benefit
$
(8
)
$
(13
)
$
(1
)
$
(1
)
$
(9
)
$
(14
)
net actuarial loss
total
$
$
$
$
$
$
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
13. pension plans, retirement benefits and savings plans (continued)
postretirement benefit plans
(at and for the year ended december31, in millions)
change in projected benefit obligation:
benefit obligation at beginning of year
$
$
benefits earned
interest cost on benefit obligation
actuarial loss (gain)
(4
)
benefits paid
(20
)
(19
)
divestiture
(8
)
foreign currency exchange rate change
(1
)
benefit obligation at end of year
$
$
change in plan assets:
fair value of plan assets at beginning of year
$
$
actual return on plan assets
company contributions
benefits paid
(20
)
(19
)
asset transferdivestiture
(3
)
fair value of plan assets at end of year
funded status of plan at year end
$
(248
)
$
(227
)
amounts recognized in the statement of financial position consist of:
accrued under-funded benefit plan liability
$
(248
)
$
(227
)
total
$
(248
)
$
(227
)
amounts recognized in accumulated other changes in equity from nonowner sources consist of:
prior service benefit
$
$
net actuarial gain
(14
)
(42
)
total
$
(14
)
$
(42
)
the
total accumulated benefit obligation for the company's defined benefit pension plans was $2.02billion and $1.97billion at december31, 2008 and 2007,
respectively. the qualified domestic plan accounted for $1.89billion and $1.79billion of the total accumulated benefit obligation at december31, 2008 and 2007, respectively,
whereas the nonqualified and foreign plans accounted for $0.13billion and $0.18billion of the total accumulated benefit obligation at december31, 2008 and 2007, respectively.
for
pension plans with an accumulated benefit obligation in excess of plan assets, the aggregate projected benefit obligation was $1.98billion and the aggregate accumulated
benefit obligation was $1.97billion at december31, 2008, and were both $115million at december31, 2007. the fair value of plan assets for the above plans was
$1.76billion and $29million at december31, 2008 and 2007, respectively.
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
13. pension plans, retirement benefits and savings plans (continued)
the
company has discretion regarding whether to provide additional funding and when to provide such funding to its qualified pension plan. during 2008, the company voluntarily made
contributions totaling $450million to the qualified pension plan. the company has not determined whether or not additional funding will be made during 2009. there is no required contribution
to the qualified pension plan during 2009.
the
pension plan projected benefit obligation divestiture of $17million and the pension plan asset divestiture of $12million in 2007 was a result of the sale of the
mexican surety subsidiary, afianzadora insurgentes,s.a. de c.v., by the company in march 2007 and the transfer of certain assets in a 414(k) transfer to the travelers 401k plan in the third
quarter 2007. the 414(k) asset transfer was made as a result of the company's review of the structure and investment options available under the pension plan, and after recent changes in federal law
governing tax-deferred ira transfers for non-spouse beneficiaries.
the
following table summarizes the components of net periodic benefit cost and other amounts recognized in accumulated other changes in equity from nonowner sources related to the
benefit plans for the years ended december31, 2008, 2007 and 2006.
pension plans
postretirement benefit plans
(in millions)
net periodic benefit cost:
service cost
$
$
$
$
$
$
interest cost on benefit obligation
expected return on plan assets
(158
)
(150
)
(148
)
(1
)
(1
)
(1
)
amortization of unrecognized:
prior service benefit
(6
)
(6
)
(6
)
net actuarial loss (gain)
(3
)
(3
)
net benefit expense
$
$
$
$
$
$
other changes in benefit plan assets and benefit obligations recognized in accumulated other changes in equity from nonowner sources:
prior service benefit
$
$
$
(20
)
$
$
$
net actuarial loss (gain)
(1
)
(44
)
amortization of prior service benefit
amortization of net actuarial (loss) gain
(8
)
(4
)
total other changes recognized in accumulated other changes in equity from nonowner sources
(44
)
total other changes recognized in net benefit expense and accumulated other changes in equity from nonowner sources
$
$
$
$
$
$
(27
)
the
estimated net actuarial loss (gain) and prior service benefit for the defined benefit pension plans that will be amortized from other changes in equity from nonowner sources into net
periodic benefit cost over the next fiscal year are $22million and $(6) million, respectively. there is no
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
13. pension plans, retirement benefits and savings plans (continued)
estimated
net loss (gain) or prior service cost for the postretirement benefit plans to be amortized from other changes in equity from nonowner sources into net periodic benefit cost over the next
fiscal year.
assumptions and health care cost trend rate sensitivity
(at and for the year ended december31,)
assumptions used to determine benefit obligations
discount rate
6.30
%
6.00
%
future compensation increase rate
4.00
%
4.00
%
assumptions used to determine net periodic benefit cost
discount rate
6.00
%
6.00
%
expected long-term rate of return on pension plans' assets
8.00
%
8.00
%
expected long-term rate of return on postretirement benefit plans' assets
5.25
%
5.50
%
assumed health care cost trend rates
following year:
medical (before age 65)
9.00
%
7.00
%
medical (age 65 and older)
9.00
%
9.00
%
rate to which the cost trend rate is assumed to decline (ultimate trend rate)
5.00
%
5.00
%
year that the rate reaches the ultimate trend rate:
medical (before age 65)
medical (age 65 and older)
the
discount rate assumption used to determine the benefit obligation for 2008 was based on a yield-curve approach. under this approach, a weighted average yield is determined from a
hypothetical portfolio of high quality fixed maturity corporate bonds (rated aa or higher) available at the year-end valuation date for which the timing and amount of cash outflows
correspond with the timing and amount of the estimated benefit payouts of the company's benefit plan. the 2007 discount rate assumption was based on the moody's aa corporate bond index increased by 25
basis points to reflect the long duration nature of the pension obligation, adjusted to the nearest quarter rate, and then back-tested by comparison to a yield curve approach. the company
changed its discount rate approach as a result of the severe market disruptions that occurred during 2008 that caused the limited population of bonds contained in the moody's aa corporate bond index
to no longer be representative of a portfolio of high-quality debt instruments from which the company would choose to provide the necessary future cash flows to pay the pension benefits
when due.
in
choosing the expected long-term rate of return, the company's pension plan investment committee considered the historical returns of equity and fixed maturity markets in
conjunction with today's economic and financial market conditions.
as
an indicator of sensitivity, increasing the assumed health care cost trend rate by 1% would have increased the accumulated postretirement benefit obligation by $32million at
december31, 2008, and the aggregate of the service and interest cost components of net postretirement benefit expense by $2million for the year ended december31, 2008.
decreasing the assumed health care cost trend rate by 1% would have decreased the accumulated postretirement benefit obligation at december31, 2008
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
13. pension plans, retirement benefits and savings plans (continued)
by
$17million and the aggregate of the service and interest cost components of net postretirement benefit expense by $1million for the year ended december31, 2008.
plan assets
the percentage of the fair value of pension plan assets held by asset category is as follows:
(at december31,)
equity securities
%
%
fixed maturities
%
%
cash(1)
%
%
other
%
%
total
%
%
(1)cash
assets at december31, 2008 exceeded the maximum target of 20% due to $450million of additional funding in the second half of the year.
pension
plan assets are invested for the exclusive benefit of the plan participants and beneficiaries and are intended, over time, to satisfy the benefit obligations under the plan. risk
tolerance is established through consideration of plan liabilities, plan funded status, and corporate financial position. the asset mix guidelines have been established and are reviewed quarterly.
these guidelines are intended to serve as tools to facilitate the investment of plan assets to maximize long-term total return and the ongoing oversight of the plan's investment
performance. the investment portfolio contains a diversified mix of equity and fixed-income investments. equity investments are diversified across u.s. and non-u.s. stocks. other assets
such as partnerships and real estate are used to enhance long-term returns while improving portfolio diversification. investment risk is measured and monitored on an ongoing basis through
daily and monthly investment portfolio review, annual liability measurements, and periodic asset/liability studies.
maximum
and minimum targets for asset allocations at december31, 2008 by asset category were as follows:
asset category
plan assets
equity securities
25-75
%
fixed maturities
15-75
%
cash
0-20
%
other
0-10
%
equity
securities include 797,600 shares of the company's common stock with a market value of $36million at december31, 2008.
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
13. pension plans, retirement benefits and savings plans (continued)
the
company's other postretirement benefit plan weighted-average asset allocations at december31, 2008 and 2007 by asset category were as follows:
asset category
fixed maturities
%
%
cash
%
%
equity securities
%
%
estimated future benefit payments
benefits expected to be paid, which reflect estimated future employee service, are estimated to be:
expected payments by period (in millions)
pension plans
postretirement
benefit plans
prescription
drug subsidy
$
$
$
2014 through 2018
1,022
savings plan
the company has a savings plan, the travelers 401(k) savings plan (the savings plan), in which substantially all company employees are
eligible to participate. under the savings plan, the company matched employee contributions up to 5% of eligible pay, with a maximum annual match of $5,000 which becomes 100% vested after three years
of service. the company match contributed to accounts in 2006 was primarily in the form of the company's common stock. beginning with the 2006 match that was contributed in 2007, the company matching
contribution is made in cash and invested according to the employee's current investment elections. the company matching contribution can be reinvested at any time into any other investment option.
the expense related to this plan was $94million and $78million for the years ended december31, 2008 and 2007, respectively.
included
in the savings plan are a legacy savings plus plan (spp) and a stock ownership plan (sop) in which substantially all employees who were hired by legacy spc before
april1, 2004 were eligible to participate. in 2004 under the spp, the company matched 100% of employees' contributions up to a maximum of 6% of their salary. the match was in the form of
preferred shares, to the extent available in the sop, or in the company's common shares. also allocated to participants were preferred shares equal to the value of dividends on previously allocated
shares. each share of preferred stock pays a dividend of $11.72 annually and is currently convertible into eight shares of the company's common stock. the sop has no preferred shares available for
future allocations.
all
common shares and the common stock equivalent of all preferred shares held by the savings plan are considered outstanding for diluted eps computations and dividends paid on all
shares are charged to retained earnings.
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
14. leases
rent expense was $243million, $237million and $238million in 2008, 2007 and 2006, respectively.
future
minimum annual rental payments under noncancellable operating leases are $180million, $161million, $128million, $99million, $74million and
$160million for 2009, 2010, 2011, 2012, 2013 and 2014 and thereafter, respectively. future sublease rental income aggregating approximately $16million will partially offset these
commitments.
15. contingencies, commitments and guarantees
contingencies
the following section describes the major pending legal proceedings, other than ordinary routine litigation incidental to the business,
to which the company or any of its subsidiaries is a party or to which any of the company's property is subject.
asbestos- and environmental-related proceedings
in the ordinary course of its insurance business, the company receives claims for insurance arising under policies issued by the
company asserting alleged injuries and damages from asbestos- and environmental-related exposures that are the subject of related coverage litigation, including, among others, the litigation described
below. the company continues to be subject to aggressive asbestos-related litigation. the conditions surrounding the final resolution of these claims and the related litigation continue to change. the
company is defending its asbestos- and environmental-related litigation vigorously and believes that it has meritorious defenses; however, the outcomes of these disputes are uncertain. in this regard,
the company employs dedicated specialists and aggressive resolution strategies to manage asbestos and environmental loss exposure, including settling litigation under appropriate circumstances. for a
discussion of other information regarding the company's asbestos and environmental exposure, see "partiiitem7management's discussion and analysis of financial
condition and results of operationsasbestos claims and litigation," "environmental claims and litigation" and "uncertainty regarding adequacy of asbestos and
environmental reserves."
in
october 2001 and april 2002, two purported class action suits (wise v. travelers and meninger v.
travelers) were filed against tpc and other insurers (not including spc) in state court in west virginia. these and other cases subsequently filed in west virginia were
consolidated into a single proceeding in the circuit court of kanawha county, west virginia. the plaintiffs allege that the insurer defendants engaged in unfair trade practices by inappropriately
handling and settling asbestos claims. the plaintiffs seek to reopen large numbers of settled asbestos claims and to impose liability for damages, including punitive damages, directly on insurers.
similar lawsuits were filed in massachusetts and hawaii state courts (these suits and the west virginia suits are collectively referred to as the statutory and hawaii actions).
in
march 2002, the plaintiffs in consolidated asbestos actions pending before a mass tort panel of judges in west virginia state court amended their complaint to include tpc as a
defendant, alleging that tpc and other insurers breached alleged duties to certain users of asbestos products. the plaintiffs seek damages, including punitive damages. lawsuits seeking similar relief
and raising similar allegations, primarily violations of purported common law duties to third parties, are also pending in texas state court against tpc and spc, and in louisiana state court against
tpc (the claims asserted
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
15. contingencies, commitments and guarantees (continued)
in
these suits, together with the west virginia suit, are collectively referred to as the common law claims).
the
federal bankruptcy court that had presided over the bankruptcy of tpc's former policyholder johns-manville corporation issued a temporary injunction prohibiting the prosecution of
the statutory actions (but not the hawaii actions), the common law claims and an additional set of cases filed in various state courts in texas and ohio, and enjoining certain attorneys from filing
any further lawsuits against tpc based on similar allegations. notwithstanding the injunction, additional common law claims were filed against tpc.
in
november 2003, the parties reached a settlement of the statutory and hawaii actions. this settlement includes a lump-sum payment of up to $412million by tpc,
subject to a number of significant contingencies. in may 2004, the parties reached a settlement resolving substantially all pending and similar future common law claims against tpc. this settlement
requires a payment of up to $90million by tpc, subject to a number of significant contingencies. each of these settlements is contingent upon, among other things, a final order of the
bankruptcy court clarifying that all of these claims, and similar future asbestos-related claims against tpc, are barred by prior orders entered by the bankruptcy court.
on
august17, 2004, the bankruptcy court entered an order approving the settlements and clarifying its prior orders that all of the pending statutory and hawaii actions and
substantially all common law
claims pending against tpc are barred. the order also applies to similar direct action claims that may be filed in the future.
on
march29, 2006, the u.s. district court for the southern district of newyork substantially affirmed the bankruptcy court's orders while vacating that portion of the
bankruptcy court's orders that required all future direct actions against tpc to first be approved by the bankruptcy court before proceeding in state or federal court.
various
parties appealed the district court's march29, 2006 ruling to the u.s. court of appeals for the second circuit. on february15, 2008, the second circuit issued an
opinion vacating on jurisdictional grounds the district court's approval of an order issued by the bankruptcy court prohibiting the prosecution of the statutory and hawaii actions and the common law
claims, as well as future similar direct action litigation, against tpc. on february29, 2008, tpc and certain other parties to the appeals filed petitions for rehearing and/or rehearing  en banc,
requesting reinstatement of the district court's judgment, which were denied. tpc and certain other parties filed petitions for writ of
certiorari in the united states supreme court seeking review of the second circuit's decision, and on december12, 2008, the petitions were granted. unless the supreme court reverses the second
circuit's decision, and the bankruptcy court's order is reinstated and becomes final, the settlements will be voided, and tpc will have no obligation to pay the amounts due under the settlement
agreements (other than certain administrative expenses). in that case, the company intends to litigate the direct action cases vigorously.
spc,
which is not covered by the bankruptcy court rulings or the settlements described above, is a party to pending direct action cases in texas state court asserting common law claims.
all such cases that are still pending and in which spc has been served are currently on the inactive docket in texas state court. if any of those cases becomes active, spc intends to litigate those
cases vigorously.
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
15. contingencies, commitments and guarantees (continued)
currently,
it is not possible to predict legal outcomes and their impact on the future development of claims and litigation relating to asbestos and environmental claims. any such
development will be affected by future court decisions and interpretations, as well as changes in applicable legislation. because of these uncertainties, additional liabilities may arise for amounts
in excess of the current related reserves. in addition, the company's estimate of ultimate claims and claim adjustment expenses may change. these additional liabilities or increases in estimates, or a
range of either, cannot now be reasonably estimated and could result in income statement charges that could be material to the company's results of operations in future periods.
other proceedings
from time to time, the company is involved in proceedings addressing disputes with its reinsurers regarding the collection of amounts
due under the company's reinsurance agreements. these proceedings may be initiated by the company or the reinsurers and may involve the terms of the reinsurance agreements, the coverage of particular
claims, exclusions under the agreements, as well as counterclaims for rescission of the agreements. one of these disputes is the action described in the following paragraphs.
the
company's gulf operation brought an action on may22, 2003 in the supreme court of newyork, county of new york (gulf insurance company v.
transatlantic reinsurance company, et al.), against transatlantic reinsurance company (transatlantic), xl reinsurance america,inc. (xl), odyssey america reinsurance
corporation (odyssey), employers reinsurance company (employers) and gerling global reinsurance corporation of america (gerling), to recover amounts due under reinsurance contracts issued to gulf and
related to gulf's february 2003 settlement of a coverage dispute under a vehicle residual value protection insurance policy. the reinsurers asserted counterclaims seeking rescission of the vehicle
residual value reinsurance contracts issued to gulf and unspecified damages for breach of contract. gerling commenced a separate action asserting the same claims, which has been consolidated with the
original gulf action for pre-trial purposes.
gulf
has entered into final settlement agreements with employers, xl, transatlantic and odyssey which resolve all claims between gulf and these defendants under the reinsurance
agreements at issue in the litigation.
in
november 2007, the court issued rulings denying gulf's motion for partial summary judgment against gerling, the sole remaining defendant, but granting gerling's motion for partial
summary judgment on certain claims and counterclaims asserted by gulf and gerling. gulf has appealed the court's decision to the supreme court of new york appellate division, first department, and has
been granted a stay of trial on the remaining claims pending that appeal. briefing of the appeal was completed on april11, 2008, and oral argument was held on may20, 2008. gulf denies
gerling's allegations, believes that it has a strong legal basis to collect the amounts due under the reinsurance contracts and intends to vigorously pursue the action.
based
on the company's beliefs about its legal positions in its various reinsurance recovery proceedings, the company does not expect any of these matters will have a material adverse
effect on its results of operations in a future period.
as
previously disclosed, as part of industry-wide investigations that commenced in october 2004, the company and its affiliates received subpoenas and written requests for
information from a number
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
15. contingencies, commitments and guarantees (continued)
of
government agencies and authorities, including, among others, state attorneys general, state insurance departments, the u.s. attorney for the southern district of new york and the u.s. securities
and exchange commission (sec). the areas of pending inquiry addressed to the company include its relationship with brokers and agents and the company's involvement with "non-traditional
insurance and reinsurance products." the company and its affiliates may receive additional subpoenas and requests for information with respect to these matters.
the
company cooperated with these subpoenas and requests for information. in addition, outside counsel, with the oversight of the company's board of directors, conducted an internal
review of certain of the company's business practices. this review was commenced after the announcement of litigation brought in october 2004 by the new york attorney general's office against a major
broker. the company completed its review. with respect to the identified finite products purchased and sold, the company concluded that no adjustment to previously issued financial statements was
required. any authority with open inquiries or investigations could ask that additional work be performed or reach conclusions different from the company's.
in
2005, four putative class action lawsuits were brought against a number of insurance brokers and insurers, including the company and/or certain of its affiliates, by plaintiffs who
allegedly purchased insurance products through one or more of the defendant brokers. the plaintiffs alleged that various insurance brokers conspired with each other and with various insurers,
including the company and/or certain of its affiliates, to artificially inflate premiums, allocate brokerage customers and rig bids for insurance products offered to those customers. to the extent
they were not originally filed there, the federal class actions were transferred to the u.s. district court for the district of new jersey and were consolidated for pre-trial proceedings
with other class actions under the caption in re insurance brokerage antitrust litigation. on august1, 2005, various plaintiffs, including the
four named plaintiffs in the above-referenced class actions, filed an amended consolidated class action complaint naming various brokers and insurers, including the company and certain of its
affiliates, on behalf of a putative nationwide class of policyholders. the complaint included causes of action under the sherman act, the racketeer influenced and corrupt organizations act (rico),
state common law and the laws of the various states prohibiting antitrust violations. the complaint sought monetary damages, including punitive damages and trebled damages, permanent injunctive
relief, restitution, including disgorgement of profits, interest and costs, including attorneys' fees. all defendants moved to dismiss the complaint for failure to state a claim. after giving
plaintiffs multiple opportunities to replead, the court dismissed the sherman act claims on august31, 2007 and the rico claims on september28, 2007, both with prejudice, and declined
to exercise supplemental jurisdiction over the state law claims. the plaintiffs are appealing the district court's decisions to the u.s. court of appeals for the third circuit. additional individual
actions have been brought in state and federal courts against the company involving allegations similar to those in in re insurance brokerage antitrust
litigation, and further actions may be brought. the company believes that all of these lawsuits have no merit and intends to defend vigorously.
in
addition to those described above, the company is involved in numerous lawsuits, not involving asbestos and environmental claims, arising mostly in the ordinary course of business
operations, either as a liability insurer defending third-party claims brought against policyholders, or as an insurer defending claims brought against it relating to coverage or the company's
business practices. while the ultimate resolution of these legal proceedings could be material to the company's results of operations
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
15. contingencies, commitments and guarantees (continued)
in
a future period, in the opinion of the company's management, none would likely have a material adverse effect on the company's financial position or liquidity.
the
company previously reported that it sought guidance from the division of corporation finance of the sec with respect to the appropriate purchase accounting treatment for certain
second quarter 2004 adjustments totaling $1.63billion. see "item1bunresolved staff comments." after discussion with the staff of the division of corporate finance and the
company's independent auditors, the company continues to believe that its accounting treatment for these adjustments is appropriate. on may3, 2006, the company received a letter from the
division of enforcement of the sec (the division) advising the company that it is conducting an inquiry relating to the second quarter 2004 adjustments and the april1, 2004 merger of spc and
tpc. the company cooperated with the division's requests for information.
other commitments and guarantees
commitments
investment commitmentsthe company has unfunded commitments to
partnerships, limited liability companies, joint ventures and certain private equity investments in which it invests. these commitments were $1.56billion and $1.60billion at
december31, 2008 and 2007, respectively.
spc's sale of minetin may 1997, spc completed the sale of its insurance brokerage operation, minet, to aon corporation. spc
agreed to indemnify aon against any future claims for professional liability and other specified events that occurred or existed prior to the sale. the company
assumed obligations related to this indemnification upon consummation of the merger. the company monitors its exposure under these claims on a regular basis. the company believes reserves for reported
claims are adequate, but it does not have information on unreported claims to estimate a range of additional liability.
from
1997 to 2004, spc purchased insurance to cover a portion of its exposure to such claims. under the sale agreement, spc also committed to acquire a minimum level of reinsurance
brokerage services from aon through 2012. that commitment requires the company to make a contractual payment to aon to the extent such minimum level of service is not acquired. the maximum annual
amount payable to aon for such services and any such contractual payment related to that commitment is $20million.
guarantees
the company has contingent obligations for guarantees related to letters of credit, issuance of debt securities, certain investments
and various indemnifications, including those related to the sale of business entities. the company also provides standard indemnifications to service providers in the normal course of business. the
indemnification clauses are often standard contractual terms. certain of these guarantees and indemnifications have no stated or notional amounts or limitation to the maximum potential future payments
and, accordingly, the company is unable to develop an estimate of the maximum potential payments for such arrangements.
in
the ordinary course of selling business entities to third parties, the company has agreed to indemnify purchasers for losses arising out of breaches of representations and warranties
with respect to the business entities being sold, covenants and obligations of the company and/or its subsidiaries
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
15. contingencies, commitments and guarantees (continued)
following
the closing, and in certain cases obligations arising from undisclosed liabilities, adverse reserve development, imposition of additional taxes due to either a change in the tax law or an
adverse interpretation of the tax law, or certain named litigation. such indemnification provisions generally survive for periods ranging from 12months following the applicable closing date to
the expiration of the relevant statutes of limitations, or in some cases agreed upon term limitations. certain of these contingent obligations are subject to deductibles which have to be incurred by
the obligee before the company is obligated to make payments. at december31, 2008, the maximum amount of the company's contingent obligation for those indemnifications that are quantifiable
related to sales of business entities was $2.10billion. the carrying value of these obligations at december31, 2008 was $58million.
16. noncash investing and financing activities
there were no significant noncash financing or investing activities during the years ended december31, 2008, 2007 and 2006.
17. consolidating financial statements of the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
the following consolidating financial statements of the company have been prepared pursuant to rule3-10 of regulations-x. these consolidating
financial statements have been prepared from the company's financial information on the same basis of accounting as the consolidated financial statements. the travelers companies,inc. has
fully and unconditionally guaranteed certain debt obligations of tpc, its wholly-owned subsidiary, which totaled $1.19billion at december31, 2008.
prior
to the merger, tpc fully and unconditionally guaranteed the payment of all principal, premiums, if any, and interest on certain debt obligations of its wholly-owned subsidiary
tighi. the travelers
companies,inc. has fully and unconditionally guaranteed such guarantee obligations of tpc. tpc is deemed to have no assets or operations independent of tighi. consolidating financial
information for tighi has not been presented herein because such financial information would be substantially the same as the financial information provided for tpc.
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
17. consolidating financial statements of the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries (continued)
consolidating statement of income (unaudited)
for the year ended december31, 2008
(in millions)
tpc
other
subsidiaries
travelers(1)
eliminations
consolidated
revenues
premiums
$
14,500
$
7,079
$
$
$
21,579
net investment income
1,774
2,792
fee income
net realized investment gains (losses)
(393
)
(49
)
(415
)
other revenues
(5
)
total revenues
16,360
8,038
(5
)
24,477
claims and expenses
claims and claim adjustment expenses
8,543
4,450
12,993
amortization of deferred acquisition costs
2,638
1,242
3,880
general and administrative expenses
2,397
1,089
3,518
interest expense
(5
)
total claims and expenses
13,652
6,785
(5
)
20,761
income (loss) before income taxes
2,708
1,253
(245
)
3,716
income tax expense
equity in net income of subsidiaries
3,182
(3,182
)
net income
$
2,098
$
1,084
$
2,924
$
(3,182
)
$
2,924
(1)the
travelers companies,inc., excluding its subsidiaries.
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
17. consolidating financial statements of the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries (continued)
consolidating statement of income (unaudited)
for the year ended december31, 2007
(in millions)
tpc
other
subsidiaries
travelers(1)
eliminations
consolidated
revenues
premiums
$
14,507
$
6,963
$
$
$
21,470
net investment income
2,553
1,130
3,761
fee income
net realized investment gains
other revenues
(11
)
total revenues
17,675
8,246
(11
)
26,017
claims and expenses
claims and claim adjustment expenses
8,375
4,022
12,397
amortization of deferred acquisition costs
2,437
1,269
3,706
general and administrative expenses
2,263
1,039
3,352
interest expense
(11
)
total claims and expenses
13,163
6,339
(11
)
19,801
income (loss) before income taxes
4,512
1,907
(203
)
6,216
income tax expense (benefit)
1,207
(47
)
1,615
equity in net income of subsidiaries
4,757
(4,757
)
net income
$
3,305
$
1,452
$
4,601
$
(4,757
)
$
4,601
(1)the
travelers companies,inc., excluding its subsidiaries.
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
17. consolidating financial statements of the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries (continued)
consolidating statement of income (unaudited)
for the year ended december31, 2006
(in millions)
tpc
other
subsidiaries
travelers(1)
eliminations
consolidated
revenues
premiums
$
13,861
$
6,899
$
$
$
20,760
net investment income
2,357
1,059
(2
)
3,517
fee income
net realized investment gains (losses)
(11
)
(24
)
other revenues
(11
)
total revenues
16,900
8,070
(13
)
25,090
claims and expenses
claims and claim adjustment expenses
8,116
4,128
12,244
amortization of deferred acquisition costs
2,228
1,111
3,339
general and administrative expenses
2,309
1,120
3,458
interest expense
(13
)
total claims and expenses
12,770
6,367
(13
)
19,365
income (loss) before income taxes
4,130
1,703
(108
)
5,725
income tax expense (benefit)
1,118
(37
)
1,517
equity in net income of subsidiaries
4,279
(4,279
)
net income
$
3,012
$
1,267
$
4,208
$
(4,279
)
$
4,208
(1)the
travelers companies,inc., excluding its subsidiaries.
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
17. consolidating financial statements of the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries (continued)
consolidating balance sheet (unaudited)
at december31, 2008
(in millions)
tpc
other
subsidiaries
travelers(1)
eliminations
consolidated
assets
fixed maturities, available for sale at fair value (including $8 subject to securities lending) (amortized cost $61,569)
$
41,329
$
19,635
$
$
$
61,275
equity securities, at fair value (cost $461)
real estate
short-term securities
2,213
1,169
1,840
5,222
other investments
1,987
3,035
total investments
45,738
22,654
2,346
70,738
cash
investment income accrued
premiums receivable
4,037
1,917
5,954
reinsurance recoverables
9,417
4,815
14,232
ceded unearned premiums
deferred acquisition costs
1,506
1,774
deferred tax asset
1,319
1,965
contractholder receivables
4,726
1,624
6,350
goodwill
2,412
3,366
other intangible assets
investment in subsidiaries
28,181
(28,181
)
other assets
1,873
2,570
total assets
$
72,948
$
34,323
$
30,661
$
(28,181
)
$
109,751
liabilities
claims and claim adjustment expense reserves
$
35,810
$
18,913
$
$
$
54,723
unearned premium reserves
7,609
3,348
10,957
contractholder payables
4,726
1,624
6,350
payables for reinsurance premiums
debt
1,193
4,979
6,181
other liabilities
4,033
1,297
5,693
total liabilities
53,654
25,436
5,342
84,432
shareholders' equity
preferred stock savings planconvertible preferred stock (0.3 shares issued and outstanding)
common stock (1,750.0shares authorized; 585.1shares issued and outstanding)
19,242
(392
)
19,242
additional paid-in capital
11,054
7,141
(18,195
)
retained earnings
8,328
1,628
13,314
(9,956
)
13,314
accumulated other changes in equity from nonowner sources
(88
)
(274
)
(900
)
(900
)
treasury stock, at cost (128.8shares)
(6,426
)
(6,426
)
total shareholders' equity
19,294
8,887
25,319
(28,181
)
25,319
total liabilities and shareholders' equity
$
72,948
$
34,323
$
30,661
$
(28,181
)
$
109,751
(1)the
travelers companies,inc., excluding its subsidiaries.
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
17. consolidating financial statements of the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries (continued)
consolidating balance sheet (unaudited)
at december31, 2007
(in millions)
tpc
other
subsidiaries
travelers(1)
eliminations
consolidated
assets
fixed maturities, available for sale at fair value (including $1,988 subject to securities lending) (amortized cost $64,152)
$
42,278
$
22,249
$
$
$
64,920
equity securities, at fair value (cost $473)
real estate
short-term securities
2,721
1,290
1,175
5,186
other investments
2,294
3,374
total investments
47,571
25,471
1,776
74,818
cash
investment income accrued
premiums receivable
4,037
2,105
6,142
reinsurance recoverables
10,126
5,515
15,641
ceded unearned premiums
1,123
deferred acquisition costs
1,530
1,809
deferred tax asset
1,207
contractholder receivables
4,924
1,772
6,696
goodwill
2,412
3,366
other intangible assets
investment in subsidiaries
29,522
(29,522
)
other assets
1,935
(169
)
2,476
total assets
$
75,429
$
37,891
$
31,595
$
(29,691
)
$
115,224
liabilities
claims and claim adjustment expense reserves
$
37,000
$
20,700
$
$
$
57,700
unearned premium reserves
7,674
3,553
11,227
contractholder payables
4,924
1,772
6,696
payables for reinsurance premiums
debt
1,595
4,664
(169
)
6,242
other liabilities
3,844
1,966
6,125
total liabilities
55,369
28,429
4,979
(169
)
88,608
shareholders' equity
preferred stock savings planconvertible preferred stock (0.3 shares issued and outstanding)
common stock (1,750.0shares authorized; 627.8shares issued and outstanding)
18,990
(396
)
18,990
additional paid-in capital
11,052
7,134
(18,186
)
retained earnings
8,487
1,690
11,110
(10,177
)
11,110
accumulated other changes in equity from nonowner sources
(763
)
treasury stock, at cost (82.9shares)
(4,266
)
(4,266
)
total shareholders' equity
20,060
9,462
26,616
(29,522
)
26,616
total liabilities and shareholders' equity
$
75,429
$
37,891
$
31,595
$
(29,691
)
$
115,224
(1)the
travelers companies,inc., excluding its subsidiaries.
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
17. consolidating financial statements of the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries (continued)
consolidating statement of cash flows (unaudited)
for the twelve months ended december31, 2008
(in millions)
tpc
other
subsidiaries
travelers(1)
eliminations
consolidated
cash flows from operating activities
net income
$
2,098
$
1,084
$
2,924
$
(3,182
)
$
2,924
net adjustments to reconcile net income to net cash provided by operating activities
(501
)
(383
)
net cash provided by operating activities
3,047
3,073
(3,565
)
3,138
cash flows from investing activities
proceeds from maturities of fixed maturities
2,511
2,304
4,869
proceeds from sales of investments:
fixed maturities
3,529
3,389
6,932
equity securities
real estate
other investments
purchases of investments:
fixed maturities
(6,316
)
(4,811
)
(11,127
)
equity securities
(3
)
(91
)
(1
)
(95
)
real estate
(38
)
(38
)
other investments
(392
)
(275
)
(667
)
net sales (purchases) of short-term securities
(247
)
(666
)
(406
)
securities transactions in course of settlement
(325
)
(318
)
other
(373
)
(45
)
net cash provided by (used in) investing activities
(406
)
(596
)
(162
)
cash flows from financing activities
issuance of debt
payment of debt
(403
)
(149
)
(552
)
dividends paid to shareholders
(715
)
(715
)
issuance of common stockemployee share options
treasury shares acquiredshare repurchase authorization
(2,167
)
(2,167
)
treasury shares acquirednet employee share-based compensation
(29
)
(29
)
excess tax benefits from share-based payment arrangements
dividends paid to parent company
(2,257
)
(1,104
)
3,361
capital contributions and loans between subsidiaries
(178
)
(26
)
net cash used in financing activities
(2,660
)
(1,282
)
(2,491
)
3,565
(2,868
)
effect of exchange rate changes on cash
(29
)
(29
)
net increase (decrease) in cash
(19
)
(14
)
cash at beginning of period
cash at end of period
$
$
$
$
$
supplemental disclosure of cash flow information
income taxes paid (received)
$
$
$
(229
)
$
$
interest paid
$
$
$
$
$
(1)the
travelers companies,inc., excluding its subsidiaries.
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
17. consolidating financial statements of the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries (continued)
consolidating statement of cash flows (unaudited)
for the twelve months ended december31, 2007
(in millions)
tpc
other
subsidiaries
travelers(1)
eliminations
consolidated
cash flows from operating activities
net income
$
3,305
$
1,452
$
4,601
$
(4,757
)
$
4,601
net adjustments to reconcile net income to net cash provided by operating activities
(81
)
(2,304
)
2,338
net cash provided by operating activities
3,224
2,184
2,297
(2,419
)
5,286
cash flows from investing activities
proceeds from maturities of fixed maturities
2,972
2,312
5,305
proceeds from sales of investments:
fixed maturities
3,730
3,584
7,323
equity securities
real estate
other investments
1,460
purchases of investments:
fixed maturities
(8,077
)
(6,642
)
(14,719
)
equity securities
(62
)
(71
)
(2
)
(135
)
real estate
(1
)
(73
)
(74
)
other investments
(543
)
(197
)
(740
)
net purchases of short-term securities
(72
)
(292
)
(198
)
(562
)
securities transactions in course of settlement
(96
)
(24
)
(3
)
(123
)
other
(427
)
(378
)
net cash used in investing activities
(1,680
)
(673
)
(173
)
(2,526
)
cash flows from financing activities
issuance of debt
2,461
2,461
payment of debt
(860
)
(1,096
)
(1,956
)
dividends paid to shareholders
(742
)
(742
)
issuance of common stockemployee share options
treasury shares acquiredshare repurchase authorization
(2,920
)
(2,920
)
treasury shares acquirednet employee share-based compensation
(39
)
(39
)
excess tax benefits from share-based payment arrangements
dividends paid to parent company
(1,287
)
(1,440
)
2,727
capital contributions and loans between subsidiaries
(151
)
(21
)
(308
)
net cash used in financing activities
(1,667
)
(1,591
)
(2,114
)
2,419
(2,953
)
effect of exchange rate changes on cash
net increase (decrease) in cash
(123
)
(75
)
(188
)
cash at beginning of period
cash at end of period
$
$
$
$
$
supplemental disclosure of cash flow information
income taxes paid (received)
$
1,074
$
$
(166
)
$
$
1,346
interest paid
$
$
$
$
$
(1)the
travelers companies,inc., excluding its subsidiaries.
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
17. consolidating financial statements of the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries (continued)
consolidating statement of cash flows (unaudited)
for the twelve months ended december31, 2006
(in millions)
tpc
other subsidiaries
travelers(1)
eliminations
consolidated
cash flows from operating activities
net income
$
3,012
$
1,267
$
4,208
$
(4,279
)
$
4,208
net adjustments to reconcile net income to net cash provided by operating activities
(153
)
(2,930
)
3,124
net cash provided by operating activities
2,859
1,792
1,278
(1,155
)
4,774
cash flows from investing activities
proceeds from maturities of fixed maturities
3,410
2,388
5,810
proceeds from sales of investments:
fixed maturities
2,192
2,166
4,401
equity securities
other investments
1,111
purchases of investments:
fixed maturities
(7,852
)
(5,960
)
(33
)
(13,845
)
equity securities
(11
)
(72
)
(83
)
real estate
(2
)
(73
)
(75
)
other investments
(567
)
(138
)
(705
)
net (purchases) sales of short-term securities
(481
)
(85
)
securities transactions in course of settlement
(92
)
other
(327
)
(325
)
net cash provided by (used in) investing activities
(2,139
)
(1,079
)
(3,064
)
cash flows from financing activities
issuance of debt
payment of debt
(154
)
(652
)
(806
)
dividends paid to shareholders
(702
)
(702
)
issuance of common stockemployee share options
treasury shares acquiredshare repurchase authorization
(1,103
)
(1,103
)
treasury shares acquirednet employee share-based compensation
(17
)
(17
)
excess tax benefits from share-based payment arrangements
dividends paid to parent company
(375
)
(780
)
1,155
capital contributions and loans between subsidiaries
(8
)
other
(2
)
net cash used in financing activities
(531
)
(788
)
(1,429
)
1,155
(1,593
)
effect of exchange rate changes on cash
net increase (decrease) in cash
(70
)
cash at beginning of period
cash at end of period
$
$
$
$
$
supplemental disclosure of cash flow information
income taxes paid (received)
$
$
$
(164
)
$
$
interest paid
$
$
$
$
$
(1)the
travelers companies,inc., excluding its subsidiaries.
table of contents
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
18. selected quarterly financial data (unaudited)
2008 (in millions, except per share data)
first
quarter
second
quarter
third
quarter
fourth
quarter
total
total revenues
$
6,232
$
6,295
$
6,145
$
5,805
$
24,477
total expenses
4,918
5,008
5,957
4,878
20,761
income before income taxes
1,314
1,287
3,716
income tax expense (benefit)
(26
)
net income
$
$
$
$
$
2,924
net income per share:(1)
basic
$
1.57
$
1.57
$
0.36
$
1.37
$
4.90
diluted
1.54
1.54
0.36
1.35
4.82
2007 (in millions, except per share data)
first
quarter
second
quarter
third
quarter
fourth
quarter
total
total revenues
$
6,427
$
6,573
$
6,526
$
6,491
$
26,017
total expenses
4,967
4,932
4,852
5,050
19,801
income before income taxes
1,460
1,641
1,674
1,441
6,216
income tax expense
1,615
net income
$
1,086
$
1,254
$
1,198
$
1,063
$
4,601
net income per share:(1)
basic
$
1.62
$
1.90
$
1.85
$
1.67
$
7.04
diluted
1.56
1.86
1.81
1.64
6.86
(1)due
to the averaging of shares, quarterly earnings per share may not add to the total for the full year.
table of contents
item9.changes in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and financial disclosure
not applicable.
item9a.controls and procedures
the company maintains disclosure controls and procedures (as that term is defined in rules13a-15(e) and
15d-15(e) under the securities exchange act of 1934, as amended (exchange act)) that are designed to ensure that information required to be disclosed in the company's reports under the
exchange act is recorded, processed, summarized and
reported within the time periods specified in the securities and exchange commission's rules and forms, and that such information is accumulated and communicated to the company's management, including
its chief executive officer and chief financial officer, as appropriate, to allow timely decisions regarding required disclosures. any controls and procedures, no matter how well designed and
operated, can provide only reasonable assurance of achieving the desired control objectives. the company's management, with the participation of the company's chief executive officer and chief
financial officer, has evaluated the effectiveness of the design and operation of the company's disclosure controls and procedures as of december31, 2008. based upon that evaluation and
subject to the foregoing, the company's chief executive officer and chief financial officer concluded that, as of december31, 2008, the design and operation of the company's disclosure
controls and procedures were effective to accomplish their objectives at the reasonable assurance level.
in
addition, except as described above, there was no change in the company's internal control over financial reporting (as that term is defined in rules13a-15(f) and
15d-15(f) under the exchange act) that occurred during the quarter ended december31, 2008 that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to materially affect, the company's
internal control over financial reporting.
table of contents
management's report on internal control over financial reporting
management of the company is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over financial reporting. the
company's internal control over financial reporting is designed to provide reasonable assurances regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of the consolidated financial
statements of the company in accordance with u.s. generally accepted accounting principles. the company's accounting policies and internal controls over financial reporting, established and maintained
by management, are under the general oversight of the company's audit committee.
the
company's internal control over financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that:
pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and
dispositions of the assets of the company;
provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in
accordance with u.s. generally accepted accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures are being made only in accordance with authorizations of the company's management and directors; and
provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use or disposition of
assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements.
because
of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. also, projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future
periods are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree or compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
management
has assessed the company's internal control over financial reporting as of december31, 2008. the standard measures adopted by management in making its evaluation are
the measures in the internal-control integrated framework published by the committee of sponsoring organizations of the treadway commission.
based
upon its assessment, management has concluded that the company's internal control over financial reporting was effective at december31, 2008, and that there were no
material weaknesses in the company's internal control over financial reporting as of that date.
kpmgllp,
an independent registered public accounting firm, which has audited and reported on the consolidated financial statements contained in this form10-k,
has issued its report on the effectiveness of the company's internal control over financial reporting which follows this report.
table of contents
report of independent registered public accounting firm
the
board of directors and stockholders
the travelers companies,inc.:
we
have audited the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries internal control over financial reporting as of december31, 2008, based on criteria established in internal
controlintegrated framework issued by the committee of sponsoring organizations of the treadway commission (coso). the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries management is
responsible for maintaining effective internal control over financial reporting and for its assessment of the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting, included in the accompanying
management's report on internal control over financial reporting. our responsibility is to express an opinion on the company's internal control over financial reporting based on our audit.
we
conducted our audit in accordance with the standards of the public company accounting oversight board (united states). those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain reasonable assurance about whether effective internal control over financial reporting was maintained in all material respects. our audit included obtaining an understanding of internal control
over financial reporting, assessing the risk that a material weakness exists, and testing and evaluating the design and operating effectiveness of internal control based on the assessed risk. our
audit also included performing such other procedures as we considered necessary in the circumstances. we believe that our audit provides a reasonable basis for our opinion.
a
company's internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of
financial statements for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. a company's internal control over financial reporting includes those policies and procedures
that (1)pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company; (2)provide
reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and that receipts and
expenditures of the company are being made only in accordance with authorizations of management and directors of the company; and (3)provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely
detection of unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the company's assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements.
because
of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. also, projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future
periods are subject to the
risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
in
our opinion, the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries maintained, in all material respects, effective internal control over financial reporting as of december31,
2008, based on criteria established in internal controlintegrated framework issued by the committee of sponsoring organizations of the treadway commission.
we
also have audited, in accordance with the standards of the public company accounting oversight board (united states), the consolidated balance sheet of the travelers
companies,inc. and subsidiaries as of december31, 2008 and 2007, and the related consolidated statements of income, changes in shareholders' equity, and cash flows for each of the
years in the three-year period ended december31, 2008, and our report dated february19, 2009 expressed an unqualified opinion on those consolidated financial statements.
/s/kpmgllp
kpmgllp
minneapolis,
minnesota
february19, 2009
table of contents
item9b.other information
on february18, 2009, the company amended its bylaws to provide that its principal executive office is at 485 lexington avenue,
new york, ny 10017 rather than 385 washington street, saint paul, mn 55102.
part iii
item10.directors, executive officers and corporate governance
executive officers of the company
set forth below is information concerning the company's executive officers as of february19, 2009.
name
age
office
jay s. fishman
chairman of the board of directors and chief executive officer
jay s. benet
vice chairman and chief financial officer
charles j. clarke
vice chairman
william h. heyman
vice chairman and chief investment officer
alan d. schnitzer
vice chairman, chief legal officer and executive vice presidentfinancial, professional and international insurance
brian w. maclean
president and chief operating officer
andy f. bessette
executive vice president and chief administrative officer
kenneth f. spence, iii
executive vice president and general counsel
doreen spadorcia
executive vice presidentclaim services
joseph p. lacher, jr.
executive vice presidentpersonal insurance and select accounts
john j. albano
executive vice presidentbusiness insurance
samuel g. liss
executive vice presidentstrategic development
william a. bloom
executive vice presidentinsurance operations and systems
jay s. fishman, 56, has been chairman since september 2005 and chief executive officer of the company since joining spc in october 2001.
he held the additional title of president from october 2001 until june 2008 and chairman of spc from october 2001 until the merger. mr.fishman held several key executive posts at
citigroupinc. from 1998 to october 2001, including chairman, chief executive officer and president of the travelers insurance businesses. starting in 1989, mr.fishman worked as an
executive for primerica, which became part of citigroup.
jay s. benet, 56, has been vice chairman and chief financial officer since august 2005, and before that, he was executive vice president
and chief financial officer of the company since the merger, and from february 2002 until the merger, he held those same offices at tpc. from march 2001 until january 2002, mr.benet was the
worldwide head of financial planning, analysis and reporting at citigroup and chief financial officer for citigroup's global consumer europe, middle east and africa unit between april 2000 and march
2001. before that, mr.benet spent 10years in various executive positions with travelers life& annuity, including chief financial officer of travelers life& annuity and
executive vice president, group annuity from december 1998 to april 2000, and senior vice president group annuity from december 1996 to december 1998. prior to joining travelers life& annuity,
mr.benet was a partner of coopers& lybrand (now pricewaterhousecoopers).
charles j. "chuck" clarke, 73, has been vice chairman of the company since the merger at which time he was serving in the roles of
president, vice chairman and director of tpc. mr.clarke joined travelers in 1958 as an assistant underwriter. during his tenure at travelers, mr.clarke progressed through positions of
increasing responsibility. of note, he was appointed senior vice
table of contents
president
for the national accounts group's property-casualty business in 1985 and subsequently assumed the responsibility of chairman of commercial lines in 1990.
william h. heyman, 60, has been chief investment officer of the company since the merger and vice chairman since may 2005. prior to may
2005, he was executive vice president and chief investment officer of the company since the merger. prior to the merger, he held those same offices with spc since he joined spc in may 2002.
mr.heyman held various executive positions with citigroup from 1995 through 2002, including the position of chairman of citigroup investments from 2000 to 2002. prior to joining citigroup in
1995, mr.heyman was, successively: a managing director of salomon brothers; director of the division of market regulation of the u.s. securities and exchange commission; and a managing
director of smith barney.
alan d. schnitzer, 43, has been vice chairman and chief legal officer since joining the company in april 2007 and executive vice
presidentfinancial, professional and international insurance since may 2008. prior to that time, he was a partner at the law firm of simpson thacher& bartlettllp, where he
advised corporate clients on a variety of transactions and general corporate law matters. mr.schnitzer joined simpson thacher in 1991.
brian w. maclean, 55, has been chief operating officer since may 2005 and president since june 2008. prior to that, he had been executive
vice president and chief operating officer since may 2005. prior to that, he had been co-chief operating officer of the company since february1, 2005. before that, he was executive
vice president, claim services for the company, and prior thereto, for tpc. prior to that, mr.maclean served as president of select accounts for tighi from july 1999 to january 2002. he also
served as chief financial officer of claim services from march 1993 to june 1996. from june 1996 to july 1999, mr.maclean was chief financial officer for commercial lines. he joined tighi in
1988.
andy f. bessette, 55, has been executive vice president and chief administrative officer of the company since the merger, and prior to
that, he held the same offices with spc since joining spc in january 2002. before that, he was vice president of corporate real estate and services for tpc. from 1980 to december 2001,
mr.bessette held a number of management positions at tighi.
kenneth f. spence, iii, 53, has been executive vice president and general counsel of the company since january 2005. from august 2004 to
january 2005, he was senior vice president and general counsel. prior to that, mr.spence served in several leadership positions in the company's legal services group, and from april 1998 until
the merger, in spc's legal services group. mr.spence joined spc in april 1998, upon spc's merger with usf&g corporation, where he had served as legal counsel.
doreen spadorcia, 51, has been executive vice presidentclaim services, since march2, 2005. prior to that, she was
president and chief executive officer of bond operations for the company since the merger and, before that, for tpc since june 2002. from 1994 to may 2002, she managed the tpc bond claim operation and
served as general counsel of that business unit. she joined tighi in 1986 as a claim attorney.
joseph p. lacher, jr., 39, has been executive vice presidentpersonal insurance and select accounts for the company since
january 2005, and prior to that, he had been senior vice president of the company in charge of those operations. prior to the merger, he was executive vice presidentpersonal for tpc.
before that, he was senior vice president of product& actuarial for tpc's personal insurance operations since april 2001. mr.lacher was senior vice president of personal strategic
distribution for tighi from april 1999 to april 2001, and from april 1996 to april 1999, he was chief financial officer of select accounts. mr.lacher joined tighi in 1991.
john j. albano, 59, has been executive vice president of the company since november 2005, and he is currently executive vice
presidentbusiness insurance. in 1998, he assumed the position of
table of contents
chief
underwriting officer and chief operating officer for national accounts and was promoted to president and ceo for national accounts in 2000 and commercial accounts in 2005. prior to that time, he
served as regional vice president of the northeast region from 1987 to 1997. he joined travelers in 1971, working in commercial lines underwriting and marketing on long island.
samuel g. liss, 52, has been executive vice presidentstrategic development since september 2006. from september 2006 to july
2008, he held the additional title of executive vice presidentfinancial, professional and international insurance. mr.liss was executive vice president of business development
when he joined the company in february 2003. in 2002, he advised spc in connection with its formation of platinum underwriters holdings,ltd, a nyse-listed bermuda reinsurance
company which succeeded spc's former assumed reinsurance operation. mr.liss served as managing director in the financial institutions group and equity research at credit suisse first boston
from 1994 to 2001.
william a. bloom, 45, has been executive vice presidentinsurance operations and systems since may 2007. prior to that, he was
senior vice president and chief information officer for the company since the merger. in 2006, he was given the additional responsibility for insurance operations, which includes the policyholder and
agency service centers, underwriting support and policy processing, agency operations and billing. prior to joining travelers as its chief information officer in 2003, mr.bloom was a partner
in the financial services practice at accenture. he also served previously as a vice president at hartford life, responsible for business technology services.
code of ethics
the company has adopted a code of business conduct and ethics (code of ethics) that applies to all employees, including executive
officers, and to directors. the code of ethics is available on the corporate governance page of the company's internet website at www.travelers.com and
is available in print to any shareholder who requests it. if the company ever were to amend or waive any provision of its code of ethics that applies to the company's principal executive officer,
principal financial officer, principal accounting officer or any person performing similar functions, the company intends to satisfy its disclosure obligations with respect to any such waiver or
amendment by posting such information on its internet website set forth above rather than by filing a form8-k.
the
following sections of the company's proxy statement relating to its annual meeting of shareholders to be held may5, 2009 are incorporated herein by reference:
"item1election of directorsnominees for election as directors," "section16(a) beneficial ownership reporting compliance," "board of directors information" and
"shareholder proposals for 2010 annual meeting."
item11.executive compensation
the following sections of the company's proxy statement relating to its annual meeting of shareholders to be held may5, 2009
are incorporated herein by reference: "executive compensation," "tabular executive compensation disclosure" and "non-employee director compensation."
item12.security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management and related shareholder matters
the "share ownership information" section of the company's proxy statement relating to its annual meeting of shareholders to be held
may5, 2009 is incorporated herein by reference.
table of contents
equity compensation plan information
the following table sets forth information as of december31, 2008 regarding the company's equity compensation plans. the only
plan pursuant to which the company may currently make additional equity grants is the travelers companies,inc. amended and restated 2004 stock incentive plan (the 2004 incentive plan) which
replaced prior share-based incentive plans (legacy plans). in connection with the adoption of the 2004 incentive plan, legacy share-based
compensation plans were terminated. outstanding grants were not affected by the termination of these legacy plans, including the reload method of option exercise related to prior option grants under
the legacy plans, and these option holders may continue to use the reload exercise method.
plan category
number of
securities to be
issued upon exercise
of outstanding
options, warrants
and rights
(a)
weighted average
exercise price of
outstanding options,
warrants and rights
(b)
number of securities
remaining available for
future issuance under
equity compensation
plans (excluding
securities reflected in
column (a))
(c)
equity compensation plans approved by security holders(1)
35,242,577
$
41.62 per share
42,491,794
(3)
equity compensation plans not approved by security holders(2)
196,004
$
41.66 per share
total
35,438,581
$
41.62 per share
42,491,794
(3)
(1)in
addition to the 2004 incentive plan, these numbers also include the st.paul global stock option plan and certain plans for st.paul's
united kingdom and ireland employees. shares of deferred stock or phantom stock units that may be settled in shares of common stock are included in column(a) of the table, but are not included
in column(b) for purposes of the weighted average exercise price of stock options.
(2)represents
options granted under the st.paul holdings 1996 stock option plan which was established to grant options to certain eligible employees of
trv's united kingdom operations. the options granted under the plan were priced at the market price of the company's common stock on the date of grant and were eligible for exercise at any time from
three to ten years after the date of grant. no additional options may be granted under the plan.
(3)these
shares are available for grant as of december31, 2008 under the 2004 incentive plan pursuant to which the compensation committee of the board
of directors may make various stock-based awards including nonqualified stock options, incentive stock options, stock appreciation rights, restricted stock, restricted stock units, deferred stock,
deferred stock units, performance awards and other stock-based or stock-denominated awards with respect to the company's common stock. the 2004 incentive plan had 35million shares initially
authorized for issuance. in addition to these 35million shares, the following shares will become available for grant under the 2004 incentive plan and, to the extent such shares became
available as of december31, 2008, they are included in the table as available for grant: (i)shares covered by outstanding awards under the 2004 incentive plan and legacy plans that are
forfeited or otherwise terminated or settled in cash or other property rather than settled through the issuance of shares; (ii)shares that are used to pay the exercise price of stock options
and shares used to pay withholding taxes on equity awards generally; and (iii)shares purchased by the company on the open market using cash from option exercises, as limited by the 2004
incentive plan.
the
provisions of the preceding paragraph that result in shares becoming available for future grants under the 2004 incentive plan also apply to any awards granted under legacy share-based
table of contents
incentive
compensation plans that were outstanding on the effective date of the 2004 incentive plan except for certain shares delivered to or retained in legacy plans in connection with the
withholding of taxes applicable to the exercise of outstanding options that have reload features.
item13.certain relationships and related transactions, and director independence
the "governance of your companysignificant governance practices" section of the company's proxy statement relating to its
annual meeting of shareholders to be held may5, 2009 is incorporated herein by reference.
item14.principal accountant fees and services
the "item2ratification of independent registered public accounting firmaudit and
non-audit fees" section of the company's proxy statement relating to its annual meeting of shareholders to be held may5, 2009 is incorporated herein by reference.
part iv
item15.exhibits and financial statement schedules
documents filed as a part of the report:
(1)financial
statements. see index to consolidated financial statements on page154 hereof.
(2)financial
statement schedules. see index to consolidated financial statements and schedules on page259 hereof.
(3)exhibits:
see
exhibit index on pages267-270 hereof.
table of contents
signatures
pursuant to the requirements of section13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934, the travelers companies,inc.
has duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.
the travelers companies,inc.
(registrant)
date: february19, 2009
by
/s/matthew s. furman
matthew s. furman
senior vice president
(authorized signatory)
pursuant
to the requirements of the securities exchange act of 1934, this report has been signed below by the following persons on behalf of the travelers companies,inc. and in
the capacities and on the dates indicated.
date
by
/s/jay s. fishman
jay s. fishman
director, chairman and chief executive officer (principal executive officer)
february19, 2009
by
/s/jay s. benet
jay s. benet
vice chairman and chief financial officer (principal financial officer)
february19, 2009
by
/s/douglas k. russell
douglas k. russell
senior vice president, corporate controller and treasurer (principal accounting officer)
february19, 2009
by
*
alan l. beller
director
february19, 2009
by
*
john h. dasburg
director
february19, 2009
by
*
janet m. dolan
director
february19, 2009
by
*
kenneth m. duberstein
director
february19, 2009
by
*
lawrence g. graev
director
february19, 2009
by
*
patricia l. higgins
director
february19, 2009
table of contents
date
by
*
thomas r. hodgson
director
february19, 2009
by
*
cleve l. killingsworth, jr.
director
february19, 2009
by
*
robert i. lipp
director
february19, 2009
by
*
blythe j. mcgarvie
director
february19, 2009
by
*
glen d. nelson, m.d.
director
february19, 2009
by
*
laurie j. thomsen
director
february19, 2009
*by
/s/matthew s. furman
matthew s. furman,
attorney-in-fact
february19, 2009
table of contents
index to consolidated financial statements and schedules
page
report of independent registered public accounting firm
consolidated statement of income for the years ended december31, 2008, 2007 and
consolidated balance sheet at december31, 2008 and 2007
consolidated statement of changes in shareholders' equity for the years
ended december31, 2008, 2007 and 2006
consolidated statement of cash flows for the years ended december31, 2008, 2007 and
notes to consolidated financial statements
schedules:
scheduleiicondensed financial information of registrant (parent company only)
scheduleiiisupplementary insurance information
schedulevvaluation and qualifying accounts
schedulevisupplementary information concerning property-casualty insurance
operations
table of contents
report of independent registered public accounting firm
the
board of directors and stockholders
the travelers companies,inc.:
under
date of february19, 2009, we reported on the consolidated balance sheet of the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries as of december31, 2008 and 2007,
and the related consolidated statements of income, changes in shareholders' equity, and cash flows for each of the years in the three-year period ended december31, 2008, which are
included in this form10-k. in connection with our audits of the aforementioned consolidated financial statements, we also audited the related financial statement schedules as
listed in the accompanying index. these financial statement schedules are the responsibility of the company's management. our responsibility is to express an opinion on these financial statement
schedules based on our audits.
in
our opinion, such financial statement schedules, when considered in relation to the basic consolidated financial statements taken as a whole, present fairly, in all material respects,
the information set forth therein.
/s/kpmgllp
kpmgllp
minneapolis,
minnesota
february19, 2009
table of contents
schedule ii
the travelers companies,inc.
(parent company only)
condensed financial information of registrant
(in millions)
condensed statement of income
for the year ended december31,
revenues
net investment income
$
$
$
net realized investment gains (losses)
(24
)
other revenues
total revenues
expenses
interest
other
total expenses
loss before income taxes and equity in net income of subsidiaries
(245
)
(203
)
(108
)
income tax expense (benefit)
(47
)
(37
)
loss before equity in net income of subsidiaries
(258
)
(156
)
(71
)
equity in net income of subsidiaries
3,182
4,757
4,279
net income
$
2,924
$
4,601
$
4,208
the condensed financial statements should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes thereto.
table of contents
schedule ii
the travelers companies,inc.
(parent company only)
condensed financial information of registrant
(in millions)
condensed balance sheet
at december31,
assets
fixed maturities
$
$
equity securities
short-term securities
1,840
1,175
investment in subsidiaries
28,181
29,522
other assets
total assets
$
30,661
$
31,595
liabilities
debt
$
4,979
$
4,664
other liabilities
total liabilities
5,342
4,979
shareholders' equity
preferred stock savings planconvertible preferred stock (0.3shares issued and outstanding at both dates)
common stock (1,750.0 shares authorized, 585.1 and 627.8 shares issued and outstanding)
19,242
18,990
retained earnings
13,314
11,110
accumulated other changes in equity from nonowner sources
(900
)
treasury stock, at cost (128.8 and 82.9 shares)
(6,426
)
(4,266
)
total shareholders' equity
25,319
26,616
total liabilities and shareholders' equity
$
30,661
$
31,595
the condensed financial statements should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes thereto.
table of contents
schedule ii
the travelers companies,inc.
(parent company only)
condensed financial information of registrant
(in millions)
condensed statement of cash flows
for the year ended december31,
cash flows from operating activities
net income
$
2,924
$
4,601
$
4,208
adjustments to reconcile net income to net cash provided by operating activities:
equity in net income of subsidiaries
(3,182
)
(4,757
)
(4,279
)
dividends received from consolidated subsidiaries
3,361
2,727
1,155
capital repaid from (contributed to) subsidiaries
(320
)
deferred federal income tax expense
change in income taxes payable
(80
)
gain on redemption of subordinated debentures
(7
)
(42
)
other
(302
)
net cash provided by operating activities
3,073
2,297
1,286
cash flows from investing activities
net sales (purchases) of short-term securities
(666
)
(198
)
other investments, net
net cash provided by (used in) investing activities
(596
)
(173
)
cash flows from financing activities
issuance of debt
2,461
payment of debt
(149
)
(1,096
)
(652
)
dividends paid to shareholders
(715
)
(742
)
(702
)
treasury stock acquiredshare repurchase authorization
(2,167
)
(2,920
)
(1,103
)
treasury stock acquirednet employee share-based compensation
(29
)
(39
)
(17
)
issuance of common stock-employee share options
other
(16
)
net cash used in financing activities
(2,491
)
(2,114
)
(1,437
)
net increase (decrease) in cash
(14
)
cash at beginning of period
cash at end of period
$
$
$
supplemental disclosure of cash flow information
cash received during the year for taxes
$
$
$
cash paid during the year for interest
$
$
$
the condensed financial statements should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes thereto.
table of contents
schedule iii
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
supplementary insurance information
2006-2008
(in millions)
segment
deferred
policy
acquisition
costs
claims and
claim
adjustment
expense
reserves
unearned
premiums
premium
revenue
net
investment
income(a)
claims and
claim
adjustment
expenses
amortization
of deferred
acquisition
costs
other
operating
expenses(b)
premiums
written
business insurance
$
$
43,982
$
5,552
$
11,180
$
1,917
$
6,608
$
1,818
$
2,080
$
11,220
financial, professional& international insurance
6,741
2,250
3,429
1,769
3,468
personal insurance
3,923
3,155
6,970
4,616
1,410
6,995
totalreportable segments
1,774
54,646
10,957
21,579
2,792
12,993
3,880
3,492
21,683
other
consolidated
$
1,774
$
54,723
$
10,957
$
21,579
$
2,792
$
12,993
$
3,880
$
3,888
$
21,683
business insurance
$
$
47,050
$
5,695
$
11,283
$
2,708
$
6,673
$
1,742
$
2,029
$
11,318
financial, professional& international insurance
6,822
2,398
3,384
1,737
3,465
personal insurance
3,747
3,134
6,803
3,987
1,310
6,835
totalreportable segments
1,809
57,619
11,227
21,470
3,761
12,397
3,706
3,318
21,618
other
consolidated
$
1,809
$
57,700
$
11,227
$
21,470
$
3,761
$
12,397
$
3,706
$
3,698
$
21,618
business insurance
$
$
49,179
$
5,778
$
10,876
$
2,538
$
6,853
$
1,547
$
2,109
$
11,046
financial, professional& international insurance
6,238
2,301
3,321
1,794
3,393
personal insurance
3,785
3,149
6,563
3,597
1,154
6,711
totalreportable segments
1,615
59,202
11,228
20,760
3,515
12,244
3,339
3,449
21,150
other
consolidated
$
1,615
$
59,288
$
11,228
$
20,760
$
3,517
$
12,244
$
3,339
$
3,782
$
21,150
(a)see
note2 to the consolidated financial statements for discussion of the method used to allocate net investment income and invested assets to the
identified segments.
(b)expense
allocations are determined in accordance with prescribed statutory accounting practices. these practices make a reasonable allocation of all
expenses to those product lines with which they are associated.
table of contents
schedule v
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
valuation and qualifying accounts
(in millions)
balance at
beginning of
period
charged to
costs and
expenses
charged to
other
accounts(1)
deductions(2)
balance
at end of
period
reinsurance recoverables
$
$
$
$
$
allowance for uncollectible:
premiums receivable from underwriting activities
$
$
$
$
$
deductibles
$
$
$
$
$
reinsurance recoverables
$
$
$
$
$
allowance for uncollectible:
premiums receivable from underwriting activities
$
$
$
$
$
deductibles
$
$
(19
)
$
$
$
reinsurance recoverables
$
$
$
$
$
allowance for uncollectible:
agency loans
$
$
(3
)
$
$
$
premiums receivable from underwriting activities
$
$
$
$
$
deductibles
$
$
$
$
$
(1)charged
to claims and claim adjustment expenses in the consolidated statement of income.
(2)credited
to the related asset account.
table of contents
schedule vi
the travelers companies,inc. and subsidiaries
supplementary information concerning property-casualty insurance operations(1)
2006-2008
(in millions)
claims and claim adjustment expenses incurred related to:
deferred
policy
acquisition
costs
amortization
of deferred
acquisition
costs
paid claims
and claim
adjustment
expenses
affiliation with registrant(2)
claims and
claim adjustment
expense reserves
discount from
reserves for
unpaid claims
unearned
premiums
earned
premiums
net
investment
income
current
year
prior
year
premiums
written
$
1,774
$
54,646
$
1,012
$
10,957
$
21,579
$
2,792
$
14,504
$
(1,725
)
$
3,880
$
13,117
$
21,683
$
1,809
$
57,619
$
1,049
$
11,227
$
21,470
$
3,761
$
12,848
$
(672
)
$
3,706
$
11,945
$
21,618
$
1,615
$
59,202
$
1,069
$
11,228
$
20,760
$
3,517
$
12,533
$
(429
)
$
3,339
$
12,911
$
21,150
(1)excludes
accident and health insurance business.
(2)consolidated
property-casualty insurance operations.
table of contents
exhibit index
exhibit number
description of exhibit
3.1
amended and restated articles of incorporation of the travelers companies,inc. (the "company"), effective as of may1, 2007, were filed as exhibit3.1 to the company's quarterly report on form10-q
for the fiscal quarter ended june30, 2007, and are incorporated herein by reference.
3.2
amended and restated bylaws of the company, effective as of february18, 2009, are filed herewith.
10.1
trademark license agreement, dated as of august19, 2002, by and between travelers property casualty corp. ("tpc") and the travelers insurance company, was filed as exhibit10.2 to tpc's quarterly report on
form10-q for the fiscal quarter ended september30, 2002, and is incorporated herein by reference.
10.2
revolving credit agreement, dated june10, 2005, between the company and a syndicate of financial institutions, was filed as exhibit10.1 to the company's quarterly report on form10-q for the fiscal
quarter ended june30, 2005, and is incorporated herein by reference.
10.3
*
amended and restated executive employment agreement between tpc and robert i. lipp, dated as of november16, 2003, was filed as exhibit10.22 to tpc's annual report on form10-k for the fiscal year
ended december31, 2003, and is incorporated herein by reference.
10.4
*
assignment and assumption agreement, dated as of april1, 2004, by and between tpc, as the assignor, and the company, as assignee, relating to the amended and restated executive employment agreement between tpc
and robert i. lipp was filed as exhibit10.15 to the company's quarterly report on form10-q for the fiscal quarter ended march31, 2004, and is incorporated herein by reference.
10.5
*
letter agreement between alan d. schnitzer and the company, dated april15, 2007, was filed as exhibit10.1 to the company's quarterly report on form10-q for the fiscal quarter ended june30, 2007,
and is incorporated herein by reference.
10.6
*
the company's senior executive performance plan was filed as exhibit10.1 to the company's quarterly report on form10-q for the fiscal quarter ended march31, 2005, and is incorporated herein by
reference.
10.7
*
form of executive officer capital accumulation program restricted stock award notification and agreement was filed as exhibit10.2 to the company's quarterly report on form10-q for the fiscal quarter ended
march31, 2005, and is incorporated herein by reference.
10.8
*
the st.paul companies,inc. ("spc") deferred stock plan for non-employee directors was filed as exhibit10(a) to the company's annual report on form10-k for the fiscal year ended december31,
2000, and is incorporated herein by reference.
10.9
*
the spc amended and restated 1994 stock incentive plan was filed as exhibit10(f) to the company's annual report on form10-k for the fiscal year ended december31, 2001, and is incorporated herein by
reference.
10.10
*
the spc directors' charitable award program, as amended, was filed as exhibit10(d) to the company's annual report on form10-k for the fiscal year ended december31, 2000, and is incorporated herein by
reference.
table of contents
exhibit number
description of exhibit
10.11
*
the spc annual incentive plan was filed as an exhibit to the spc proxy statement relating to the spc 1999 annual meeting of shareholders that was held on may4, 1999 and is incorporated herein by
reference.
10.12
*
the spc deferred management incentive awards plan was filed as exhibit10(a) to the company's annual report on form10-k for the fiscal year ended december31, 1997, and is incorporated herein by
reference.
10.13
*
the spc directors' deferred compensation plan was filed as exhibit10(b) to the company's annual report on form10-k for the fiscal year ended december31, 1997, and is incorporated herein by
reference.
10.14
*
the spc benefit equalization plan2001 revision and the first and second amendments thereto were filed as exhibit10.27 to the company's annual report on form10-k for the fiscal year ended
december31, 2004, and are incorporated herein by reference.
10.15
*
tpc compensation plan for non-employee directors, as amended on january22, 2004, was filed as exhibit10.16 to tpc's annual report on form10-k for the fiscal year ended december31, 2003, and is
incorporated herein by reference.
10.16
*
tpc 2002 stock incentive plan, as amended effective january23, 2003, was filed as exhibit10.22 to tpc's annual report on form10-k for the fiscal year ended december31, 2002, and is incorporated
herein by reference.
10.17
*
tpc deferred compensation plan was filed as exhibit10.23 to tpc's annual report on form10-k for the fiscal year ended december31, 2002, and is incorporated herein by reference.
10.18
*
tpc benefit equalization plan was filed as exhibit10.24 to tpc's annual report on form10-k for the fiscal year ended december31, 2002, and is incorporated herein by reference.
10.19
*
the company's deferred compensation plan, as amended and restated, effective january1, 2009, was filed as exhibit99.1 to the company's registration statement on forms-8 (registration
no.333-157091) dated february4, 2009, and is incorporated herein by reference.
10.20
*
amended and restated time sharing agreement, effective august5, 2008, by and between the travelers companies,inc. and jay s. fishman, was filed as exhibit10.1 to the company's quarterly report on
form10-q for the fiscal quarter ended september30, 2008, and is incorporated herein by reference.
10.21
*
the travelers severance plan (as amended through may10, 2007) was filed as exhibit10.2 to the company's quarterly report on form10-q for the fiscal quarter ended june30, 2007, and is
incorporated herein by reference.
10.22
amended and restated tax allocation agreement, dated as of march27, 2002, between tpc and citigroupinc., was filed as exhibit10.2 to tpc's quarterly report on form10-q for the fiscal quarter
ended march31, 2002, and is incorporated herein by reference.
10.23
*
form of non-solicitation and non-disclosure agreement for executive officers, amending the st.paul travelers companies,inc. severance plan, was filed as exhibit99 to the company's form8-k filed
on february16, 2006, and is incorporated herein by reference.
table of contents
exhibit number
description of exhibit
10.24
assurance of discontinuance with the office of the attorney general of the state of newyork, the office of the attorney general of the state of illinois and the office of the attorney general of the state of
connecticut was filed as exhibit10.1 to the company's quarterly report on form10-q for the fiscal quarter ended june30, 2006, and is incorporated herein by reference.
10.25
stipulation with the new york state department of insurance was filed as exhibit10.2 to the company's quarterly report on form10-q for the fiscal quarter ended june30, 2006, and is incorporated
herein by reference.
10.26
*
current director compensation program, effective as of february4, 2009, is filed herewith.
10.27
*
amended and restated employment agreement between the company and jay s. fishman, dated as of december19, 2008, is filed herewith.
10.28
*
the travelers companies,inc. amended and restated 2004 stock incentive plan is filed herewith.
10.29
*
the company's amended and restated deferred compensation plan for non-employee directors is filed herewith.
10.30
*
form of stock option grant notification and agreement is filed herewith.
10.31
*
form of performance share award notification and agreement is filed herewith.
10.32
*
form of restricted stock unit award notification and agreement is filed herewith.
10.33
*
form of 2009 performance share award notification and agreement for jay s. fishman is filed herewith.
10.34
*
form of non-employee director annual deferred stock award notification and agreement is filed herewith.
10.35
*
fifth amendment to the travelers severance plan is filed herewith.
10.36
*
the travelers benefit equalization plan, as amended and restated effective as of january1, 2009, is filed herewith.
12.1
statement regarding the computation of the ratio of earnings to fixed charges and the ratio of earnings to combined fixed charges and preferred stock dividends is filed herewith.
21.1
a list of the subsidiaries of the company is filed herewith.
23.1
consent of kpmgllp, independent registered public accounting firm, with respect to the incorporation by reference of kpmgllp's audit report into registration statements on formss-8 of the company
(sec file no.33-56987, no.333-50943, no.333-63114, no.333-63118, no.333-65726, no.333-107698, no.333-107699, no.333-114135, no.333-117726, no.333-120998, no.333-128026,
no.333-157091 and no.333-157092) and forms-3 (sec file no.333-156132) is filed herewith.
24.1
power of attorney is filed herewith.
31.1
certification of jay s. fishman, chairman and chief executive officer of the company, as required by section302 of the sarbanes- oxley act of 2002 is filed herewith.
31.2
certification of jay s. benet, vice chairman and chief financial officer of the company, as required by section302 of the sarbanes- oxley act of 2002 is filed herewith.
table of contents
exhibit number
description of exhibit
32.1
certification of jay s. fishman, chairman and chief executive officer of the company, as required by section906 of the sarbanes- oxley act of 2002 is filed herewith.
32.2
certification of jay s. benet, vice chairman and chief financial officer of the company, as required by section906 of the sarbanes- oxley act of 2002 is filed herewith.
the
total amount of securities authorized pursuant to any instrument defining rights of holders of long-term debt of the company does not exceed 10% of the total assets of
the company and its consolidated subsidiaries. therefore, the company is not filing any instruments evidencing long-term debt. however, the company will furnish copies of any such
instrument to the securities and exchange commission upon request.
copies
of any of the exhibits referred to above will be furnished to security holders who make written request therefor to the travelers companies,inc., 385 washington street,
saint paul, mn, 55102, attention: corporate secretary.
filed
herewith
*management
contract or compensatory plan in which directors and/or executive officers are eligible to participate.
