10-k
cat_10-kx12312014.htm
10-k
cat_10-k_12.31.2014
table of contentsunited statessecurities and exchange commissionwashington, d.c. 20549form10-k(mark one)annual report pursuant to section13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934for the fiscal year ended december31, 2014 orotransition report pursuant to section13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934for the transition period from  to .commission file no.1-768caterpillar inc.(exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)delaware37-0602744(state or other jurisdiction of incorporation)(irs employer i.d. no.)100 ne adams street, peoria,illinois61629(address of principal executive offices)(zip code)registrants telephone number, including area code: (309) 675-1000securities registered pursuant to section12(b)of the act:titleofeachclassnameofeachexchangeonwhichregisteredcommon stock ($1.00 par value)(1)new york stock exchange9 3/8% debentures due march15, 2021new york stock exchange8% debentures due february15, 2023new york stock exchange5.3% debentures due september15, 2035new york stock exchange(1)in addition to the new york stock exchange, caterpillar common stock is also listed on stock exchanges in france and switzerland.securities registered pursuant to section12(g)of the act: noneindicate by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in rule405 of the securities act. yes nooindicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to section13 or section15(d)of the act. yesono indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1)has filed all reports required to be filed by section13 or 15(d)of the securities exchange act of 1934 during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2) has been subject to such filing requirements for the past 90 days. yes  no oindicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically and posted on its corporate web site, if any, every interactive data file required to be submitted and posted pursuant to rule405 of regulation s-t (232.405 of this chapter) during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to submit and post such files). yes  no oindicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to item 405 of regulation s-k is not contained herein, and will not be contained, to the best of registrants knowledge, in definitive proxy or information statements incorporated by reference in partiii of this form10-k or any amendment to this form10-k. indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer, or a smaller reporting company. see the definitions of large accelerated filer, accelerated filer and smaller reporting company in rule12b-2 of the exchange act. (check one):large accelerated filerxaccelerated fileronon-accelerated filerosmaller reporting companyoindicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in rule12b-2 of the exchange act). yesonoas of june30, 2014, there were 627,846,602 shares of common stock of the registrant outstanding, and the aggregate market value of the voting stock held by non-affiliates of the registrant (assuming only for purposes of this computation that directors and executive officers may be affiliates) was approximately $68.1 billion. as of december 31, 2014, there were 606,166,559 shares of common stock of the registrant outstanding.documents incorporated by referenceportions of the documents listed below have been incorporated by reference into the indicated parts of this form10-k, as specified in the responses to the item numbers involved.partiii2015 annual meeting proxy statement (proxy statement) to be filed with the securities and exchange commission (sec) within 120 days after the end of the calendar year.parts i,ii,ivgeneral and financial information for 2014 containing the information required by sec rule14a-3 for an annual report to security holders filed as exhibit13 to this form10-k (exhibit13).table of contentstable of contentspagepartiitem 1.business1item 1a.risk factors8item 1b.unresolved staff comments18item 1c.executive officers of the registrant19item 2.properties19item 3.legal proceedings22item 4.mine safety disclosures23partiiitem 5.market for registrants common equity, related stockholder matters and issuer purchases of equity securities23item 6.selected financial data23item 7.managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations24item 7a.quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk24item 8.financial statements and supplementary data24item 9.changes in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and financial disclosure24item 9a.controls and procedures24item 9b.other information25partiiiitem 10.directors, executive officers and corporate governance25item 11.executive compensation26item 12.security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management and related stockholder matters26item 13.certain relationships and related transactions, and director independence26item 14.principal accountant fees and services26partivitem 15.exhibits and financial statement schedules26itable of contentspartiitem 1.business.generaloriginally organized as caterpillar tractor co. in 1925 in the state of california, our company was reorganized as caterpillar inc. in 1986 in the state of delaware. as used herein, the term caterpillar, we, us, our, or the company refers to caterpillar inc. and its subsidiaries unless designated or identified otherwise.overviewwith 2014 sales and revenues of $55.184 billion, caterpillar is the worlds leading manufacturer of construction and mining equipment, diesel and natural gas engines, industrial gas turbines and diesel-electric locomotives. the company principally operates through its three product segments - resource industries, construction industries, and energy & transportation (formerly power systems) - and also provides financing and related services through its financial products segment.  caterpillar is also a leading u.s. exporter. through a global network of independent dealers and direct sales of certain products, caterpillar builds long-term relationships with customers around the world.currently, we have seven operating segments, of which four are reportable segments and are described below. further information about our reportable segments, including geographic information, appears in note23  segment information of exhibit 13.categories of business organization1. machinery, energy & transportation  represents the aggregate total of construction industries, resource industries, energy & transportation and all other operating segments and related corporate items and eliminations.2. financial products  primarily includes the companys financial products segment. this category includes caterpillar financial services corporation (cat financial), caterpillar financial insurance services (insurance services) and their respective subsidiaries.other information about our operations in 2014, including certain risks associated with our operations, is incorporated by reference from our managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations in exhibit13.construction industriesour construction industries segment is primarily responsible for supporting customers using machinery in infrastructure and building construction applications. the majority of machine sales in this segment are made in the heavy construction, general construction, rental, mining and quarry and aggregates markets.  customer demand for construction machinery has generally been characterized over the past decade by a shift from developed to developing economies. customers in developing economies often prioritize purchase price in making their investment decisions, while customers in developed economies generally weigh productivity and other performance criteria that contribute to lower lifetime owning and operating costs of a machine. in response to increased demand in developing economies, caterpillar has developed differentiated product offerings that target customers in those markets, including our sem brand machines. we believe that these customer-driven product innovations enable us to compete more effectively in developing economies.  in those developed economies that are subject to diesel engine emission requirements, we continued our multi-year roll out of products designed to meet those requirements.  the majority of construction industries' research and development spending in 2014 focused on tier 4 final compliance.  we believe that these products have been well-received by our customers and are providing us a competitive advantage.  the competitive environment for construction machinery is characterized by some global competitors and many regional and specialized local competitors. examples of global competitors include komatsu ltd., volvo construction equipment (part of the volvo group), cnh industrial n.v., deere & company, hitachi construction machinery co. ltd., j.c. bamford excavators ltd., doosan infracore co. ltd., and hyundai construction equipment (part of hyundai heavy industries). as an example of regional and local competitors, our competitors in china also include guangxi liugong machinery co. ltd., longking holdings ltd., sany heavy industry co. ltd., xiamen xgma machinery co. ltd., xcmg group, the shandong heavy industry group co., ltd.  (shantui construction machinery co. ltd.), strong construction machinery co. ltd., and  1table of contentsshandong lingong construction machinery co. ltd.  (part of  volvo group).  each of these companies has varying product lines that compete with caterpillar products, and each has varying degrees of regional focus.the construction industries product portfolio includes the following machines and related parts:backhoe loaderscompact wheel loaderssmall track-type tractorssmall wheel loaderstrack-type loadersmedium track-type tractorsskid steer loadersmini excavatorsselect work toolsmulti-terrain loaderssmall, medium and large track excavatorsmotor gradersmedium wheel loaderswheel excavatorstelehandlerscompact track loaders pipelayersmid-tier soil compactorsresource industriesthe resource industries segment is primarily responsible for supporting customers using machinery in mine and quarry applications. as a result of the acquisition of bucyrus international, inc. (bucyrus) in july 2011, caterpillar is able to offer mining customers the broadest product range in the industry.  in 2014, resource industries substantially completed a three year transition of the former bucyrus distribution business to the independent caterpillar dealers who support mining customers.  prior to 2014,  the resource industries segment also served forestry, paving, and industrial and waste customers.  due to an internal reorganization, these products were reorganized out of resource industries effective january 1, 2014 and are now included in the all other operating segments.  the competitive environment for resource industries consists of a few larger global competitors that compete in several of the markets that we serve and a substantial number of smaller companies that compete in a more limited range of products, applications, and regional markets. our global competitors include komatsu ltd., joy global inc., hitachi construction machinery co., ltd., volvo construction equipment (part of volvo group), atlas copco, and sandvik mining.  a number of chinese companies are active in the mid-tier market, including guangxi liugong machinery co., ltd., xcmg group and zhengzhou coal mining machinery group co., ltd. the resource industries product portfolio includes the following machines and related parts:electric rope shovelslarge track-type tractorswheel tractor scrapersdraglineslarge mining truckswheel dozershydraulic shovelslongwall minersmachinery componentsdrillslarge wheel loaderselectronics and control systemshighwall minersoff-highway trucksselect work toolshard rock vehiclesarticulated trucksenergy & transportationour energy & transportation segment is primarily responsible for supporting customers using reciprocating engines, turbines, diesel-electric locomotives, integrated systems and solutions, and related parts across industries serving oil and gas, power generation, industrial and marine applications as well as rail-related businesses. energy & transportation remains focused on increasing its product offerings and further integrating its products and services to provide complete systems and solutions to its customers. regulatory emissions standards of the u.s. environmental protection agency (epa) and similar standards in other developed economies have required us to make significant investments in research and development that will continue as new products are phased in over the next several years. this new product introduction process is the most extensive in our history. we believe that our emissions technology provides a competitive advantage in connection with emissions standards compliance and performance.the competitive environment for reciprocating engines in marine, oil and gas, industrial and electric power generation systems along with turbines consists of a few larger global competitors that compete in a variety of markets that caterpillar serves, and a substantial number of smaller companies that compete in a limited-size product range, geographic region and/or application. 2table of contentsprincipal global competitors include cummins inc., rolls-royce power system ag (formerly tognum ag), ge oil & gas, ge power & water, deutz ag and wartsila corp. other competitors, such as man diesel & turbo se, siemens power & gas, rolls-royce marine, mitsubishi heavy industries ltd., volvo penta (part of volvo group), weichai power co., ltd., kirloskar oil engines limited and other emerging market competitors compete in certain markets in which caterpillar competes. an additional set of competitors, including generac power systems, inc., kohler co., aggreko plc and others, are packagers who source engines and/or other components from domestic and international suppliers and market products regionally and internationally through a variety of distribution channels. in rail-related businesses, our global competitors include ge transportation, vossloh ag, siemens ag and alstom transport, and voestalpine ag. we also compete with other companies on a more limited range of products, services and/or geographic regions.the energy & transportation product portfolio includes the following:reciprocating engine powered generator setsreciprocating engines supplied to the industrial industry as well as caterpillar machineryintegrated systems used in the electric power generation industryturbines, centrifugal gas compressors and related servicesreciprocating engines and integrated systems and solutions for the marine and oil and gas industriesdiesel-electric locomotives and components and other rail-related products and servicesfinancial products segmentthe business of our financial products segment is primarily conducted by cat financial, a wholly owned finance subsidiary of caterpillar. cat financials primary business is to provide retail and wholesale financing alternatives for caterpillar products to customers and dealers around the world. retail financing is primarily comprised of the financing of caterpillar equipment, machinery and engines. cat financial also provides financing for vehicles, power generation facilities and marine vessels that, in most cases, incorporate caterpillar products. in addition to retail financing, cat financial provides wholesale financing to caterpillar dealers and purchases short-term trade receivables from caterpillar and its subsidiaries. the various financing plans offered by cat financial are primarily designed to increase the opportunity for sales of caterpillar products and generate financing income for cat financial. a significant portion of cat financials activities is conducted in north america.  cat financial also has offices and subsidiaries in asia/pacific, europe and latin america.for over 30 years, cat financial has been providing financing in the various markets in which it participates, contributing to its knowledge of asset values, industry trends, product structuring and customer needs.in certain instances, cat financials operations are subject to supervision and regulation by state, federal and various foreign governmental authorities, and may be subject to various laws and judicial and administrative decisions imposing requirements and restrictions which, among other things, (i)regulate credit granting activities and the administration of loans, (ii)establish maximum interest rates, finance charges and other charges, (iii)require disclosures to customers and investors, (iv)govern secured transactions, (v) set collection, foreclosure, repossession and other trade practices and (vi)regulate the use and reporting of information related to a borrowers credit experience. cat financials ability to comply with these and other governmental and legal requirements and restrictions affects its operations.cat financials retail leases and installment sale contracts (totaling 52 percent*) include:tax leases that are classified as either operating or finance leases for financial accounting purposes, depending on the characteristics of the lease. for tax purposes, cat financial is considered the owner of the equipment (15 percent*).finance (non-tax) leases, where the lessee for tax purposes is considered to be the owner of the equipment during the term of the lease, that either require or allow the customer to purchase the equipment for a fixed price at the end of the term (18 percent*).installment sale contracts, which are equipment loans that enable customers to purchase equipment with a down payment or trade-in and structure payments over time (18 percent*).governmental lease-purchase plans in the u.s. that offer low interest rates and flexible terms to qualified non-federal government agencies (1 percent*).cat financials wholesale notes receivable, finance leases and installment sale contracts (totaling 15 percent*) include:3table of contentsinventory/rental programs, which provide assistance to dealers by financing their new caterpillar inventory and rental fleets (5 percent*).short-term trade receivables cat financial purchased from caterpillar at a discount (10 percent*).cat financials retail notes receivables (33 percent*) include:loans that allow customers and dealers to use their caterpillar equipment or other assets as collateral to obtain financing.*indicates the percentage of cat financials total portfolio at december31, 2014. we define total portfolio as total finance receivables (net of unearned income and allowance for credit losses) plus equipment on operating leases, less accumulated depreciation. for more information on the above and cat financials concentration of credit risk, please refer to note6  cat financial financing activities of exhibit13._____________________________cat financial operates in a highly competitive environment, with financing for users of caterpillar equipment available through a variety of sources, principally commercial banks and finance and leasing companies. cat financials competitors include wells fargo equipment finance inc., general electric capital corporation and various other banks and finance companies. in addition, many of our manufacturing competitors own financial subsidiaries such as volvo financial services, komatsu financial l.p. and john deere capital corporation that utilize below-market interest rate programs (funded by the manufacturer) to assist machine sales. caterpillar and cat financial work together to provide a broad array of financial merchandising programs around the world to meet these competitive offers.cat financials financial results are largely dependent upon the ability of caterpillar dealers to sell equipment and customers willingness to enter into financing or leasing agreements. it is also affected by, among other things, the availability of funds from its financing sources, general economic conditions such as inflation and market interest rates and its cost of funds relative to its competitors.cat financial has a match funding policy that addresses interest rate risk by aligning the interest rate profile (fixed rate or floating rate) of its debt portfolio with the interest rate profile of its receivables portfolio (loans and leases with customers and dealers) within predetermined ranges on an ongoing basis. in connection with that policy, cat financial issues debt with a similar interest rate profile to its receivables, and also uses interest rate swap agreements to manage its interest rate risk exposure to interest rate changes and in some cases to lower its cost of borrowed funds. for more information regarding match funding, please see note3  derivative financial instruments and risk management of exhibit13. see also the risk factors on pages 8 through 18 for general risks associated with our financial products business included in item 1a. of this form10-k.in managing foreign currency risk for cat financials operations, the objective is to minimize earnings volatility resulting from conversion and the remeasurement of net foreign currency balance sheet positions, and future transactions denominated in foreign currencies. this policy allows the use of foreign currency forward, option and cross currency contracts to offset the risk of currency mismatch between the receivable and debt portfolios, and exchange rate risk associated with future transactions denominated in foreign currencies. substantially all such foreign currency forward, option and cross currency contracts are undesignated.cat financial provides financing only when certain criteria are met. credit decisions are based on, among other factors, the customers credit history, financial strength and intended use of equipment. cat financial typically maintains a security interest in retail-financed equipment and requires physical damage insurance coverage on financed equipment. cat financial finances a significant portion of caterpillar dealers sales and inventory of caterpillar equipment throughout the world. cat financials competitive position is improved by marketing programs offered in conjunction with caterpillar and/or caterpillar dealers. under these programs, caterpillar, or the dealer, funds an amount at the outset of the transaction, which cat financial then recognizes as revenue over the term of the financing. we believe that these marketing programs provide cat financial a significant competitive advantage in financing caterpillar products.caterpillar insurance company, a wholly owned subsidiary of insurance services, is a u.s. insurance company domiciled in missouri and primarily regulated by the missouri department of insurance. caterpillar insurance company is licensed to conduct property and casualty insurance business in 50 states and the district of columbia and, as such, is also regulated in those jurisdictions. the state of missouri acts as the lead regulatory authority and monitors caterpillar insurance companys financial status to ensure that it is in compliance with minimum solvency requirements, as well as other financial ratios prescribed by the national association of insurance commissioners. caterpillar insurance company is also licensed to 4table of contentsconduct insurance business through a branch in zurich, switzerland and, as such, is regulated by the swiss financial market supervisory authority.caterpillar life insurance company, a wholly owned subsidiary of caterpillar, is a u.s. insurance company domiciled in missouri and primarily regulated by the missouri department of insurance. caterpillar life insurance company is licensed to conduct life and accident and health insurance business in 26 states and the district of columbia and, as such, is also regulated in those jurisdictions. the state of missouri acts as the lead regulatory authority and it monitors the financial status to ensure that it is in compliance with minimum solvency requirements, as well as other financial ratios prescribed by the national association of insurance commissioners. caterpillar life insurance company provides stop loss insurance protection to a missouri voluntary employees beneficiary association (veba) trust used to fund medical claims of salaried retirees of caterpillar under the veba.caterpillar insurance co. ltd., a wholly owned subsidiary of insurance services, is a captive insurance company domiciled in bermuda and regulated by the bermuda monetary authority. caterpillar insurance co. ltd. is a class2 insurer (as defined by the bermuda insurance amendment act of 1995), which primarily insures its parent and affiliates. the bermuda monetary authority requires an annual financial filing for purposes of monitoring compliance with solvency requirements.caterpillar product services corporation (cpsc), a wholly owned subsidiary of caterpillar, is a warranty company domiciled in missouri. cpsc previously conducted a machine extended service contract program in germany and france by providing machine extended warranty reimbursement protection to dealers in germany and france.  the program was discontinued effective january 1, 2013, though cpsc continues to provide extended warranty reimbursement protection under existing contracts.caterpillar insurance services corporation, a wholly owned subsidiary of insurance services, is a tennessee insurance brokerage company licensed in all 50 states and the district of columbia. it provides brokerage services for all property and casualty and life and health lines of business.caterpillars insurance group provides protection for claims under the following programs:contractual liability insurance to caterpillar and its affiliates, caterpillar dealers and original equipment manufacturers (oems) for extended service contracts (parts and labor) offered by caterpillar, third party dealers and oems.cargo insurance for the worldwide cargo risks of caterpillar products.contractors equipment physical damage insurance for equipment manufactured by caterpillar or oems, which is leased, rented or sold by third party dealers to customers.general liability, employers liability, auto liability and property insurance for caterpillar.retiree medical stop loss insurance for medical claims under the veba.brokerage services for property and casualty and life and health business.acquisitions information related to acquisitions appears in note24  acquisitions of exhibit13.competitive environmentcaterpillar products and product support services are sold worldwide into a variety of highly competitive markets. in all markets, we compete on the basis of product performance, customer service, quality and price. from time to time, the intensity of competition results in price discounting in a particular industry or region. such price discounting puts pressure on margins and can negatively impact operating profit. outside the united states, certain of our competitors enjoy competitive advantages inherent to operating in their home countries or regions.5table of contentsraw materials and component productswe source our raw materials and manufactured components from suppliers both domestically and internationally. these purchases include unformed materials and rough and finished parts. unformed materials include a variety of steel products, which are then cut or formed to shape and machined in our facilities. rough parts include various sized steel and iron castings and forgings, which are machined to final specification levels inside our facilities. finished parts are ready to assemble components, which are made either to caterpillar specifications or to the supplier developed specifications. we machine and assemble some of the components used in our machines, engines and power generation units and to support our after-market dealer parts sales. we also purchase various goods and services used in production, logistics, offices and product development processes. we maintain global strategic sourcing models to meet our global facilities production needs while building long-term supplier relationships and leveraging enterprise spend. we expect our suppliers to maintain, at all times, industry-leading levels of quality and the ability to timely deliver raw materials and component products for our machine and engine products. we use a variety of agreements with suppliers to protect our intellectual property and processes to monitor and mitigate risks of the supply base causing a business disruption. the risks monitored include supplier financial viability, the ability to increase or decrease production levels, business continuity, quality and delivery.order backlogthe dollar amount of backlog believed to be firm was approximately $17.3 billion at december 31, 2014 and $18.0 billion at december31, 2013.  compared to year-end 2013, the order backlog declined about $700 million. decreases in resource industries were partially offset by increases in energy & transportation. in 2013, the order backlog declined significantly for mining-related products within resource industries and declined slightly for energy & transportation.  these declines were partially offset by a substantial increase in construction industries. of the total backlog at december31, 2014, approximately $3.0 billion was not expected to be filled in 2015.dealers and distributorsour machines are distributed principally through a worldwide organization of dealers (dealer network), 48 located in the united states and 129 located outside the united states, serving 182 countries and operating 3,580 places of business, including 1,267 dealer rental outlets. reciprocating engines are sold principally through the dealer network and to other manufacturers for use in their products. some of the reciprocating engines manufactured by our subsidiary perkins engines company limited, are also sold through a worldwide network of 103 distributors located in 182 countries. some of the electric power generation systems manufactured by our subsidiary caterpillar northern ireland limited, formerly known as f.g. wilson engineering limited, are sold through its worldwide network of 264 distributors located in 145 countries. some of the large, medium speed reciprocating engines are also sold under the mak brand through a worldwide network of 19 distributors located in 130 countries.our dealers do not deal exclusively with our products; however, in most cases sales and servicing of our products are the dealers principal business. some products, primarily turbines and locomotives, are sold directly to end customers through sales forces employed by the company. at times, these employees are assisted by independent sales representatives.  while the large majority of our worldwide dealers are independently owned and operated, we own and operate a dealership in japan that covers approximately 85% of the japanese market:  nippon caterpillar division.  we are currently operating this japanese dealer directly and its results are reported in the all other operating segments.  there are also three independent dealers in the southern region of japan.for caterpillar branded products, the companys relationship with each of its independent dealers is memorialized in a standard sales and service agreement. pursuant to this agreement, the company grants the dealer the right to purchase and sell its products and to service the products in a specified geographic service territory. prices to dealers are established by the company after receiving input from dealers on transactional pricing in the marketplace. the company also agrees to defend its intellectual property and to provide warranty and technical support to the dealer. the agreement further grants the dealer a non-exclusive license to use the companys trademarks, service marks and brand names. in some instances, a separate trademark agreement exists between the company and a dealer.in exchange for these rights, the agreement obligates the dealer to develop and promote the sale of the companys products to current and prospective customers in the dealers service territory. each dealer agrees to employ adequate sales and support personnel to market, sell and promote the companys products, demonstrate and exhibit the products, perform the companys product improvement programs, inform the company concerning any features that might affect the safe operation of any of the 6table of contentscompanys products and maintain detailed books and records of the dealers financial condition, sales and inventories and make these books and records available at the companys reasonable request.these sales and service agreements are terminable at will by either party primarily upon 90 days written notice and provide for termination automatically if the dealer files for bankruptcy protection or upon the occurrence of comparable action seeking protection from creditors.patents and trademarksour products are sold primarily under the brands caterpillar, cat, design versions of cat and caterpillar, electro-motive, fg wilson, mak, mwm, perkins, progress rail, sem and solar turbines. we own a number of patents and trademarks, which have been obtained over a period of years and relate to the products we manufacture and the services we provide. these patents and trademarks have been of value in the growth of our business and may continue to be of value in the future. we do not regard our business as being dependent upon any single patent or group of patents.research and developmentwe have always placed strong emphasis on product-oriented research and development relating to the development of new or improved machines, engines and major components. in 2014, 2013 and 2012, we spent $2,135 million, $2,046 million and  $2,466  million, or 3.9, 3.7, and 3.7 percent of our sales and revenues, respectively, on our research and development programs. research and development expense is expected to increase about 10 percent in 2015.employmentas of december31, 2014, we employed 114,233 full-time persons of whom 63,419 were located outside the united states.  in the united states, most of our 50,814 employees are at-will employees and, therefore, not subject to any type of employment contract or agreement. at select business units, certain highly specialized employees have been hired under employment contracts that specify a term of employment and specify pay and other benefits.as of december 31, 2014, there were approximately 10,400 u.s. hourly production employees who were covered by collective bargaining agreements with various labor unions, including the united automobile, aerospace and agricultural implement workers of america (uaw), the international association of machinists and the united steelworkers.  approximately 7,700 of such employees are covered by collective bargaining agreements with the uaw that expire on march 1, 2017 and december 17, 2018.  outside the united states, the company enters into employment contracts and agreements in those countries in which such relationships are mandatory or customary. the provisions of these agreements correspond in each case with the required or customary terms in the subject jurisdiction.sales and revenuessales and revenues outside the united states were 62 percent of consolidated sales and revenues for 2014, 67 percent for 2013 and 69 percent for 2012.environmental mattersthe company is regulated by federal, state and international environmental laws governing our use, transport and disposal of substances and control of emissions. in addition to governing our manufacturing and other operations, these laws often impact the development of our products, including, but not limited to, required compliance with air emissions standards applicable to internal combustion engines. we have made, and will continue to make, significant research and development and capital expenditures to comply with these emissions standards.we are engaged in remedial activities at a number of locations, often with other companies, pursuant to federal and state laws. when it is probable we will pay remedial costs at a site, and those costs can be reasonably estimated, the investigation, remediation, and operating and maintenance costs are accrued against our earnings. costs are accrued based on consideration of currently available data and information with respect to each individual site, including available technologies, current applicable laws and regulations, and prior remediation experience.  where no amount within a range of estimates is more likely, we accrue the minimum.  where multiple potentially responsible parties are involved, we consider our proportionate share of the probable costs.  in formulating the estimate of probable costs, we do not consider amounts expected to be recovered from insurance companies or others. we reassess these accrued amounts on a quarterly basis.  the amount recorded for environmental remediation is not material and is included in the line item "accrued expenses" in statement 3 -- "consolidated 7table of contentsfinancial position at december 31" of exhibit 13.  there is no more than a remote chance that a material amount for remedial activities at any individual site, or at all the sites in the aggregate, will be required.  available informationthe company files electronically with the securities and exchange commission (sec) required reports on form8-k, form10-q, form10-k and form11-k; proxy materials; ownership reports for insiders as required by section16 of the securities exchange act of 1934 (exchange act); and registration statements on forms s-3 and s-8, as necessary; and other forms or reports as required. the public may read and copy any materials the company has filed with the sec at the secs public reference roomat 100 f street, n.e., washington, dc 20549. the public may obtain information on the operation of the public reference roomby calling the sec at (800) sec-0330. the sec maintains an internet site (www.sec.gov) that contains reports, proxy and information statements, and other information regarding issuers that file electronically with the sec. the company maintains an internet site (www.caterpillar.com) and copies of our annual report on form10-k, quarterly reports on form10-q, current reports on form8-k and any amendments to these reports filed or furnished with the sec are available free of charge through our internet site (www.caterpillar.com/secfilings) as soon as reasonably practicable after filing with the sec. copies of our board committee charters, our boards guidelines on corporate governance issues, worldwide code of conduct and other corporate governance information are available on our internet site (www.caterpillar.com/governance). the information contained on the companys website is not included in, or incorporated by reference into, this annual report on form10-k.additional company information may be obtained as follows:current information -phone our information hotline - (800) 228-7717 (u.s. or canada) or (858) 764-9492 (outside u.s. or canada) to request company publications by mail, listen to a summary of caterpillars latest financial results and current outlook, or to request a copy of results by facsimile or mailrequest, view or download materials on-line or register for email alerts at www.caterpillar.com/materialsrequesthistorical information -view/download on-line at www.caterpillar.com/historicalitem 1a.risk factors.the statements in this section describe the most significant risks to our business and should be considered carefully in conjunction with managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations and the notes to consolidated financial statements of exhibit13 to this form10-k. in addition, the statements in this section and other sections of this form10-k, including in "management's discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations" in exhibit 13, include forward-looking statements as that term is defined in the private securities litigation reform act of 1995 and involve uncertainties that could significantly impact results. forward-looking statements give current expectations or forecasts of future events about the company or our outlook. you can identify forward-looking statements by the fact they do not relate to historical or current facts and by the use of words such as believe, expect, estimate, anticipate, will be, should, plan, project, intend, could and similar words or expressions.forward-looking statements are based on assumptions and on known risks and uncertainties. although we believe we have been prudent in our assumptions, any or all of our forward-looking statements may prove to be inaccurate, and we can make no guarantees about our future performance. should known or unknown risks or uncertainties materialize or underlying assumptions prove inaccurate, actual results could materially differ from past results and/or those anticipated, estimated or projected.we undertake no obligation to publicly update forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise. you should, however, consult any subsequent disclosures we make in our filings with the sec on form10-q or form8-k.the following is a cautionary discussion of risks, uncertainties and assumptions that we believe are significant to our business. in addition to the factors discussed elsewhere in this report, the following are some of the important factors that, individually or in the aggregate, we believe could make our actual results differ materially from those described in any forward-looking 8table of contentsstatements. it is impossible to predict or identify all such factors and, as a result, you should not consider the following factors to be a complete discussion of risks, uncertainties and assumptions.our business is highly sensitive to global and regional economic conditions and economic conditions in the industries we serve.our results of operations are materially affected by economic conditions globally and regionally and in the particular industries we serve. the demand for our products and services tends to be cyclical and can be significantly reduced in an economic environment characterized by lower levels of government and business investment, lower levels of business confidence, lower corporate earnings, higher unemployment and lower consumer spending. a prolonged period of slow growth may also reduce demand for our products and services. economic conditions vary across regions and countries, and demand for our products generally increases in those regions and countries experiencing economic growth and investment. a change in the global mix of regions and countries experiencing economic growth and investment could have an adverse effect on our business, results of operations and financial condition.the energy and mining industries are major users of our products, including the coal, iron ore, gold, copper, oil and natural gas industries. decisions to purchase our products are dependent upon the performance of these industries, which in turn are dependent in part on commodity prices. increases in demand or output in these industries may lead to increases in demand for our products.  conversely, if demand or output in these industries declines, the demand for our products will generally decrease. prices of commodities in these industries are frequently volatile and can change abruptly and unpredictibly in response to general economic conditions, economic growth, government actions, regulatory actions, commodity inventories and any disruptions in production or distribution. we assume certain prices for key commodities in preparing our general economic and financial outlooks (outlooks). commodity prices lower than those assumed in our outlooks may negatively impact our business, results of operations and financial condition.  economic conditions affecting the industries we serve may in the future also lead to reduced capital expenditures by our customers.  reduced capital expenditures by our customers are likely to lead to a decrease in the demand for our products and may also result in a decrease in demand for aftermarket parts as customers are likely to extend proactive maintenance schedules and delay major overhauls when possible. the rates of infrastructure spending, housing starts and commercial construction also play a significant role in our results. our products are an integral component of these activities, and as these activities decrease inside or outside of the united states, demand for our products may be significantly impacted, which could negatively impact our results. slower rates of economic growth than anticipated in our outlooks could also adversely impact our business, results of operations and financial condition.changes in government monetary or fiscal policies may negatively impact our results.most countries have established central banks to regulate monetary systems and influence economic activities, generally by adjusting interest rates. interest rate changes affect overall economic growth, which affects demand for residential and nonresidential structures, as well as energy and mined products, which in turn affects sales of our products that serve these activities. interest rate changes also affect our customers ability to finance machine purchases, can change the optimal time to keep machines in a fleet and can impact the ability of our suppliers to finance the production of parts and components necessary to manufacture and support our products. our outlooks typically include assumptions about interest rates in a number of countries. interest rates higher than those contained in our assumptions could result in lower sales than anticipated and supply chain inefficiencies.central banks and other policy arms of many countries take actions to vary the amount of liquidity and credit available in an economy. liquidity and credit policies different from those assumed in our outlooks could impact the customers and markets we serve or our suppliers, which could adversely impact our business, results of operations and financial condition.changes in monetary and fiscal policies, along with other factors, may cause currency exchange rates to fluctuate.  actions that lead the currency exchange rate of a country where we manufacture products to increase relative to other currencies could reduce the competitiveness of products made in that country, which could adversely affect our competitive position, results of operations and financial condition.government policies on taxes and spending also affect our business. throughout the world, government spending finances a significant portion of infrastructure development, such as highways, airports, sewer and water systems and dams. tax regulations determine depreciation lives and the amount of money users of our products can retain, both of which influence investment decisions. unfavorable developments, such as declines in government revenues, decisions to reduce public spending or increases in taxes, could negatively impact our results.9table of contentscommodity price changes, component price increases, fluctuations in demand for our products or significant shortages of component products may adversely impact our financial results or our ability to meet commitments to customers.we are a significant user of steel and many other commodities required for the manufacture of our products.  unanticipated increases in the prices of such commodities would increase our costs, negatively impacting our business, results of operations and financial condition if we are unable to fully offset the effect of these increased costs through price increases, productivity improvements or cost reduction programs.we rely on suppliers to secure component products, particularly steel, required for the manufacture of our products.  a disruption in deliveries to or from suppliers or decreased availability of components or commodities could have an adverse effect on our ability to meet our commitments to customers or increase our operating costs. on the other hand, if demand for our products is less than we expect, we may experience excess inventories and be forced to incur additional charges and our profitability may suffer.  our business, competitive position, results of operations or financial condition could be negatively impacted if supply is insufficient for our operations.  our financial condition and results of operations may be negatively impacted if we experience excess inventories or we are unable to adjust our production schedules or our purchases from suppliers to reflect changes in customer demand and market fluctuations on a timely basis.  disruptions or volatility in global financial markets could limit our sources of liquidity, or the liquidity of our customers, dealers and suppliers.global economic conditions may cause volatility and disruptions in the capital and credit markets.  although we have generated funds from our operations to pay our operating expenses, fund our capital expenditures and support growth, fund our employee retirement benefit programs, pay dividends and buy back stock, continuing to meet these cash requirements over the long-term requires substantial liquidity and access to varied sources of funds, including capital and credit markets. changes in global economic conditions, including material cost increases and decreases in economic activity in the markets that we serve, and the success of plans to manage cost increases, inventory and other important elements of our business may significantly impact our ability to generate funds from operations. market volatility, changes in counterparty credit risk, the impact of government intervention in financial markets and general economic conditions may also adversely impact our ability to access capital and credit markets to fund operating needs. global or regional economic downturns could cause financial markets to decrease the availability of liquidity, credit and credit capacity for certain issuers, including certain of our customers, dealers and suppliers. an inability to access capital and credit markets may have an adverse effect on our business, results of operations, financial condition and competitive position.in addition, demand for our products generally depends on customers ability to pay for our products, which, in turn, depends on their access to funds. subject to global economic conditions, customers may experience increased difficulty in generating funds from operations.  capital and credit market volatility and uncertainty may cause financial institutions to revise their lending standards, resulting in decreased access to capital. if capital and credit market volatility occurs, customers liquidity may decline which, in turn, would reduce their ability to purchase our products.our global operations are exposed to political and economic risks, commercial instability and events beyond our control in the countries in which we operate.our global operations are dependent upon products manufactured, purchased and sold in the u.s. and internationally, including in countries with political and economic instability. in some cases, these countries have greater political and economic volatility and greater vulnerability to infrastructure and labor disruptions than in our other markets. our business could be negatively impacted by adverse fluctuations in freight costs, limitations on shipping and receiving capacity, and other disruptions in the transportation and shipping infrastructure at important geographic points of exit and entry for our products.  operating and seeking to expand business in a number of different regions and countries exposes us to a number of risks, including:multiple and potentially conflicting laws, regulations and policies that are subject to change;imposition of currency restrictions, restrictions on repatriation of earnings or other restraints;imposition of burdensome tariffs or quotas;imposition of new or additional trade and economic  sanctions laws imposed by the u.s. or foreign governments;10table of contentsnational and international conflict, including the ongoing conflict in ukraine; war or terrorist acts; andpolitical and economic instability or civil unrest that may severely disrupt economic activity in affected countries.the occurrence of one or more of these events may negatively impact our business, results of operations and financial condition.failure to maintain our credit ratings would increase our cost of borrowing and could adversely affect our cost of funds, liquidity, competitive position and access to capital markets. each of caterpillars and cat financials costs of borrowing and ability to access the capital markets are affected not only by market conditions but also by the short- and long-term debt ratings assigned to their respective debt by the major credit rating agencies. these ratings are based, in significant part, on each of caterpillars and cat financials performance as measured by financial metrics such as net worth and interest coverage and leverage ratios, as well as transparency with rating agencies and timeliness of financial reporting. there can be no assurance that caterpillar or cat financial will be able to maintain their credit ratings and the failure of either caterpillar or cat financial to do so could adversely affect our cost of funds, liquidity, competitive position and access to the capital markets, including restricting, in whole or in part, our access to the commercial paper market. there can be no assurance that the commercial paper market will continue to be a reliable source of short-term financing for cat financial or an available source of short-term financing for caterpillar.  an inability to access the capital markets could have an adverse effect on our cash flow, results of operations and financial condition.our financial products segment is subject to risks associated with the financial services industry.cat financial is significant to our operations and provides financing support to a significant share of our global sales. the inability of cat financial to access funds to support its financing activities to our customers could have an adverse effect on our business, results of operations and financial condition.continuing to meet cat financial's cash requirements over the long-term could require substantial liquidity and access to sources of funds, including capital and credit markets.  cat financial has continued to maintain access to key global medium term note and commercial paper markets, but there can be no assurance that such markets will continue to represent a reliable source of financing.  if global economic conditions were to deteriorate, cat financial could face materially higher financing costs, become unable to access adequate funding to operate and grow its business and/or meet its debt service obligations as they mature, and be required to draw upon contractually committed lending agreements and/or by seeking other funding sources. however, there can be no assurance that such agreements and other funding sources would be available or sufficient under extreme market conditions. any of these events could negatively impact cat financials business, as well as our and cat financial's results of operations and financial condition.  market disruption and volatility may also lead to a number of other risks in connection with these events, including but not limited to:market developments that may affect customer confidence levels and cause declines in the demand for financing and adverse changes in payment patterns, causing increases in delinquencies and default rates, which could impact cat financials write-offs and provision for credit losses.the process cat financial uses to estimate losses inherent in its credit exposure requires a high degree of managements judgment regarding numerous subjective qualitative factors, including forecasts of economic conditions and how economic predictors might impair the ability of its borrowers to repay their loans. financial market disruption and volatility may impact the accuracy of these judgments.cat financials ability to engage in routine funding transactions or borrow from other financial institutions on acceptable terms or at all could be adversely affected by disruptions in the capital markets or other events, including actions by rating agencies and deteriorating investor expectations.as cat financials counterparties are primarily financial institutions, their ability to perform in accordance with any of its underlying agreements could be adversely affected by market volatility and/or disruptions in financial markets.11table of contentschanges in interest rates or market liquidity conditions could adversely affect cat financial's and our earnings and/or cash flow.changes in interest rates and market liquidity conditions could have an adverse effect on cat financial's and our earnings and cash flows.  because a significant number of the loans made by cat financial are made at fixed interest rates, its business is subject to fluctuations in interest rates.  changes in market interest rates may influence its financing costs, returns on financial investments and the valuation of derivative contracts and could reduce its and our earnings and cash flows.  although cat financial manages interest rate and market liquidity risks through a variety of techniques, including a match funding program, the selective use of derivatives and a broadly diversified funding program, there can be no assurance that fluctuations in interest rates and market liquidity conditions will not have an adverse effect on its and our earnings and cash flows.  if any of the variety of instruments and strategies cat financial uses to hedge its exposure to these types of risk is ineffective, we may incur losses. with respect to insurance services' investment activities, changes in the equity and bond markets could cause an impairment of the value of its investment portfolio, requiring a negative adjustment to earnings.an increase in delinquencies, repossessions or net losses of cat financial customers could adversely affect its results.inherent in the operation of cat financial is the credit risk associated with its customers.  the creditworthiness of each customer and the rate of delinquencies, repossessions and net losses on customer obligations are directly impacted by several factors, including relevant industry and economic conditions, the availability of capital, the experience and expertise of the customer's management team, commodity prices, political events and the sustained value of the underlying collateral. any increase in delinquencies, repossessions and net losses on customer obligations could have a material adverse effect on cat financial's and our earnings and cash flows.  in addition, although cat financial evaluates and adjusts its allowance for credit losses related to past due and non-performing receivables on a regular basis, adverse economic conditions or other factors that might cause deterioration of the financial health of its customers could change the timing and level of payments received and thus necessitate an increase in cat financial's estimated losses, which could also have a material adverse effect on cat financial's and our earnings and cash flows.new regulations or changes in financial services regulation could adversely impact caterpillar and cat financial.cat financials operations are highly regulated by governmental authorities in the locations where it operates, which can impose significant additional costs and/or restrictions on its business.  in the u.s., for example, certain of cat financials activities are subject to the u.s. dodd-frank wall street reform and consumer protection act (dodd-frank).  dodd-frank was signed into law in july 2010 and is a comprehensive financial reform act that includes extensive provisions regulating the financial services industry.  certain aspects of dodd-frank remain to be implemented under the rulemaking and regulatory authority of the sec, the united states commodity futures trading commission and federal banking regulators.  as such, cat financial has become and could continue to become subject to additional regulatory costs both directly and indirectly, through increased costs of doing business with marketing intermediaries that are now subject to extensive regulation pursuant to dodd-frank and other regulatory initiatives. for example, derivatives dealers may seek to pass to us the cost of any margin, capital or other regulatory requirements to which they become subject to under dodd-frank, or other regulatory reforms.  as the regulatory regime is still developing and the rulemaking process has been progressing slowly, the ultimate costs and impact of dodd-frank and other regulatory initiatives on cat financials business remain uncertain and may not be known for years. however, such costs could be significant and have an adverse effect on cat financial's and our results of operations and financial condition.  additional regulations in the u.s. or internationally impacting the financial services industry could also add significant cost or operational constraints that might have an adverse effect on cat financial's and our results of operations and financial condition.  we may not realize all of the anticipated benefits of our acquisitions, joint ventures or divestitures, or these benefits may take longer to realize than expected.in pursuing our business strategy, we routinely evaluate targets and enter into agreements regarding possible acquisitions, divestitures and joint ventures.  we often compete with others for the same opportunities. to be successful, we conduct due diligence to identify valuation issues and potential loss contingencies, negotiate transaction terms, complete complex transactions and manage post-closing matters such as the integration of acquired businesses.  our due diligence reviews are subject to the completeness and accuracy of disclosures made by third parties.  we may incur unanticipated costs or expenses following a completed acquisition, including post-closing asset impairment charges, expenses associated with eliminating duplicate facilities, litigation, and other liabilities.12table of contentsthe risks associated with our past or future acquisitions also include the following:the business culture of the acquired business may not match well with our culture;technological and product synergies, economies of scale and cost reductions may not occur as expected;unforeseen expenses, delays or conditions may be imposed upon the acquisition, including due to required regulatory approvals or consents;we may acquire or assume unexpected liabilities or be subject to unexpected penalties or other enforcement actions;faulty assumptions may be made regarding the integration process;unforeseen difficulties may arise in integrating operations, processes and systems;higher than expected investments may be required to implement necessary compliance processes and related systems, including it systems, accounting systems and internal controls over financial reporting;we may fail to retain, motivate and integrate key management and other employees of the acquired business;higher than expected costs may arise due to unforeseen changes in tax, trade, environmental, labor, safety, payroll or pension policies in any jurisdiction in which the acquired business conducts its operations; andwe may experience problems in retaining customers and integrating customer bases.many of these factors will be outside of our control and any one of them could result in increased costs, decreases in the amount of expected revenues and diversion of managements time and attention.  they may also delay the realization of the benefits we anticipate when we enter into a transaction.  in order to conserve cash for operations, we may undertake acquisitions financed in part through public offerings or private placements of debt or equity securities, or other arrangements. such acquisition financing could result in a decrease of our ratio of earnings to fixed charges and adversely affect other leverage measures. if we issue equity securities or equity-linked securities, the issued securities may have a dilutive effect on the interests of the holders of our common shares.failure to implement our acquisition strategy, including successfully integrating acquired businesses, could have an adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations. furthermore, we make strategic divestitures from time to time.  in the case of divestitures, we may agree to indemnify acquiring parties for certain liabilities arising from our former businesses.  these divestitures may also result in continued financial involvement in the divested businesses, including through guarantees or other financial arrangements, following the transaction. lower performance by those divested businesses could affect our future financial results.international trade policies may impact demand for our products and our competitive position.government policies on international trade and investment such as import quotas, capital controls or tariffs, whether adopted by individual governments or addressed by regional trade blocs, can affect the demand for our products and services, impact the competitive position of our products or prevent us from being able to sell products in certain countries. the implementation of more restrictive trade policies, such as more detailed inspections, higher tariffs or new barriers to entry, in countries where we sell large quantities of products and services could negatively impact our business, results of operations and financial condition. for example, a governments adoption of buy national policies or retaliation by another government against such policies could have a negative impact on our results of operations.the success of our business depends on our ability to develop, produce and market quality products that meet our customers needs.our business relies on continued global demand for our brands and products. to achieve business goals, we must develop and sell products that appeal to our dealers, oems and customers. this is dependent on a number of factors, including our ability to maintain key dealer relationships, our ability to produce products that meet the quality, performance and price expectations of our customers and our ability to develop effective sales, advertising and marketing programs. in addition, our continued success in selling products that appeal to our customers is dependent on leading-edge innovation, with respect to both products 13table of contentsand operations, and on the availability and effectiveness of legal protection for our innovation. failure to continue to deliver high quality, innovative, competitive products to the marketplace, to adequately protect our intellectual property rights, to supply products that meet applicable regulatory requirements, including diesel engine emission requirements and equivalent standards, or to predict market demands for, or gain market acceptance of, our products, could have a negative impact on our business, results of operations and financial condition.we operate in a highly competitive environment, which could adversely affect our sales and pricing.we operate in a highly competitive environment, and our outlook depends on a forecast of our share of industry sales based on our ability to compete with others in the marketplace. we compete on the basis of a variety of factors, including product performance, customer service, quality and price. there can be no assurance that our products will be able to compete successfully with other companies products. thus, our share of industry sales could be reduced due to aggressive pricing or product strategies pursued by competitors, unanticipated product or manufacturing difficulties, our failure to price our products competitively, our failure to produce our products at a competitive cost or an unexpected buildup in competitors new machine or dealer-owned rental fleets, leading to severe downward pressure on machine rental rates and/or used equipment prices.our sales outlook assumes that certain price increases we announce from time to time will be realized in the marketplace. changes in market acceptance of price increases, changes in market requirements for price discounts, changes in our competitors behavior or a weak pricing environment attributable to industry overcapacity could have an adverse impact on our business, results of operations and financial condition.in addition, our results and ability to compete may be impacted negatively by changes in our sales mix. our outlook assumes a certain geographic mix of sales as well as a certain product mix of sales. if actual results vary from this projected geographic and product mix of sales, our results could be negatively impacted.we may not realize all of the anticipated benefits from cost-reduction initiatives, cash flow improvement initiatives and efficiency or productivity initiatives.we are actively engaged in a number of initiatives to increase our productivity, efficiency and cash flow and to reduce costs, which we expect to have a positive effect on our business, competitive position, results of operations and financial condition.  for example, we formed the caterpillar enterprise system group in 2013 to implement sustained improvements in our operational efficiency and order-to-delivery processes so that our lead time is better aligned with customer requirements, as well as to reduce waste, further enhance quality and maximize value for our customers. we are also in the process of implementing a new enterprise resource planning (erp) system in many of our businesses to increase efficiency and harmonize our operations. there can be no assurance that this erp system, these initiatives, or others will continue to be beneficial to the extent anticipated, or that the estimated efficiency improvements, incremental cost savings or cash flow improvements will be realized as anticipated or at all. if our new erp system is not implemented successfully, it could have an adverse effect on our operations and competitive position.we expect to incur additional restructuring charges as we continue to contemplate cost reduction actions in an effort to optimize our cost structure and may not achieve the anticipated savings and benefits of these actions.throughout 2014, we implemented restructuring plans and incurred significant separation-related charges primarily related to a reduction in workforce at our gosselies, belgium, facility.  we expect to take restructuring actions in 2015 to optimize our cost structure and improve the efficiency of our operation, which will reduce our profitability in the periods incurred.  as a result of these actions, we will likely continue to incur charges, which may include but not be limited to asset impairments, employee termination costs, charges for pension and other postretirement contractual benefits, potential additional pension funding obligations, and pension curtailments, any of which could be significant, and could adversely affect our financial condition and results of operations.  in addition, we may not realize anticipated savings or benefits from past or future cost reduction actions in full or in part or within the time periods we expect.  we are also subject to the risks of labor unrest, negative publicity and business disruption in connection with our cost reduction actions. failure to realize anticipated savings or benefits from our cost reduction actions could have a material adverse effect on our business, prospects, financial condition, liquidity, results of operations and cash flows.our business is subject to the inventory management decisions and sourcing practices of our dealers and our oem customers.we sell finished products primarily through an independent dealer network and directly to oems and are subject to risks relating to their inventory management decisions and operational and sourcing practices. both carry inventories of finished 14table of contentsproducts as part of ongoing operations and adjust those inventories based on their assessments of future needs. such adjustments may impact our results positively or negatively. if the inventory levels of our dealers and oem customers are higher than they desire, they may postpone product purchases from us, which could cause our sales to be lower than the end-user demand for our products and negatively impact our results.  similarly, our results could be negatively impacted through the loss of time-sensitive sales if our dealers and oem customers do not maintain inventory levels sufficient to meet customer demand.  additionally, some of our engine customers are oems that manufacture or could in the future manufacture engines for their own products. despite their engine manufacturing abilities, these customers have chosen to outsource certain types of engine production to us due to the quality of our engine products and in order to reduce costs, eliminate production risks and maintain company focus. however, there can be no assurance that these customers will continue to outsource engine manufacture in the future. decreased levels of production outsourcing by these customers could result from a number of factors, such as shifts in our customers business strategies, acquisition by a customer of another engine manufacturer, the inability of third-party suppliers to meet specifications and the emergence of low-cost production opportunities in foreign countries. a significant reduction in the level of engine production outsourcing from our oem customers could significantly impact our revenues and, accordingly, have an adverse effect on our business, results of operations and financial condition.we are subject to stringent environmental laws and regulations that impose significant compliance costs.our facilities, operations and products are subject to increasingly stringent environmental laws and regulations globally, including laws and regulations governing emissions to noise, air, discharges to water and the generation, handling, storage, transportation, treatment and disposal of non-hazardous and hazardous waste materials. some environmental laws impose strict, retroactive and joint and several liability for the remediation of the release of hazardous substances, even for conduct that was lawful at the time it occurred, or for the conduct of, or conditions caused by, prior operators, predecessors or other third parties. failure to comply with environmental laws could expose us to penalties or clean-up costs, civil or criminal liability and sanctions on certain of our activities, as well as damage to property or natural resources. these liabilities, sanctions, damages and remediation efforts related to any non-compliance with such laws and regulations could negatively impact our ability to conduct our operations and our financial condition and results of operations.  in addition, there can be no assurances that we will not be adversely affected by costs, liabilities or claims with respect to existing or subsequently acquired operations or under present laws and regulations or those that may be adopted or imposed in the future.environmental laws and regulations may also change from time to time, as may related interpretations and other guidance. changes in environmental laws or regulations could result in higher expenses and payments, and uncertainty relating to environmental laws or regulations may also affect how we conduct our operations and structure our investments and could limit our ability to enforce our rights. changes in environmental and climate change laws or regulations, including laws relating to greenhouse gas emissions, could lead to new or additional investment in product designs and could increase environmental compliance expenditures. changes in climate change concerns, or in the regulation of such concerns, including greenhouse gas emissions, could subject us to additional costs and restrictions, including increased energy and raw materials costs.  if environmental laws or regulations are either changed or adopted and impose significant operational restrictions and compliance requirements upon us or our products, they could negatively impact our business, capital expenditures, results of operations, financial condition and competitive position.our global operations are subject to extensive trade and anti-corruption laws and regulations.due to the international scope of our operations, we are subject to a complex system of import- and export-related laws and regulations, including u.s. regulations issued by customs and border protection, the bureau of industry and security, the office of antiboycott compliance, the directorate of defense trade controls and the office of foreign assets control, as well as the counterparts of these agencies in other countries. any alleged or actual violations may subject us to government scrutiny, investigation and civil and criminal penalties, and may limit our ability to import or export our products or to provide services outside the united states. furthermore, embargoes and sanctions imposed by the u.s. and other governments restricting or  prohibiting sales to specific persons or countries or based on product classification expose us to potential criminal and civil sanctions.  we cannot predict the nature, scope or effect of future regulatory requirements to which our operations might be subject or the manner in which existing laws might be administered or interpreted.in addition, the u.s. foreign corrupt practices act and similar foreign anti-corruption laws generally prohibit companies and their intermediaries from making improper payments or providing anything of value to improperly influence foreign government officials for the purpose of obtaining or retaining business, or obtaining an unfair advantage. recent years have seen a substantial increase in the global enforcement of anti-corruption laws. our operations outside the united states, including in developing countries, could increase the risk of such violations. in addition, we enter into joint ventures with joint venture partners who are domiciled in areas of the world with laws, regulations and business practices that differ from those in the united states.  there is risk that our joint venture partners will violate applicable laws and regulations.  violations of anti-15table of contentscorruption laws or regulations by our employees, by intermediaries acting on our behalf, or by our joint venture partners may result in severe criminal or civil sanctions, could disrupt our business, and result in an adverse effect on our reputation, business and results of operations or financial condition.we may incur additional tax expense or become subject to additional tax exposure.we are subject to income taxes in the united states and numerous foreign jurisdictions. our domestic and international tax liabilities are dependent upon the location of earnings among these different jurisdictions.  our future results of operations could be adversely affected by changes in the effective tax rate as a result of a change in the mix of earnings in countries with differing statutory tax rates, changes in our overall profitability, changes in tax legislation and rates, changes in generally accepted accounting principles, changes in the valuation of deferred tax assets and liabilities, changes in the amount of earnings permanently reinvested offshore, the results of audits and examinations of previously filed tax returns and continuing assessments of our tax exposures.  we are also subject to the continuous examination of our income tax returns by the u.s. internal revenue service and other tax authorities.  for information regarding additional legal matters related to our taxes, please see note 5 (income taxes) and note 22 (environmental and legal matters) to our consolidated financial statements in exhibit 13 to this annual report on form 10-k.  we regularly assess the likelihood of an adverse outcome resulting from these examinations to determine the adequacy of our provision for taxes. there can be no assurance as to the outcome of these examinations. if our effective tax rates were to increase, or if the ultimate determination of our taxes owed is for an amount in excess of amounts previously accrued, our operating results, cash flows and financial condition could be adversely affected.  currency exchange rate fluctuations affect our results of operations, as reported in our financial statements.we conduct operations in many areas of the world, involving transactions denominated in a variety of currencies. we are subject to currency exchange rate risk to the extent that our costs are denominated in currencies other than those in which we earn revenues. in addition, because our financial statements are reported in u.s. dollars, changes in currency exchange rates between the u.s. dollar and other currencies have had, and will continue to have, an impact on our results of operations. while we customarily enter into financial transactions to address these risks, there can be no assurance that currency exchange rate fluctuations will not adversely affect our results of operations, financial condition and cash flows.  while the use of currency hedging instruments may provide us with protection from adverse fluctuations in currency exchange rates, by utilizing these instruments we potentially forego the benefits that might result from favorable fluctuations in currency exchange rates.  in addition, our outlooks do not assume fluctuations in currency exchange rates.  adverse fluctuations in currency exchange rates from the date of our outlooks could cause our actual results to differ materially from those anticipated in our outlooks and adversely impact our business, results of operations and financial condition.  we also face risks arising from the imposition of exchange controls and currency devaluations. exchange controls may limit our ability to convert foreign currencies into u.s. dollars or to remit dividends and other payments by our foreign subsidiaries or businesses located in or conducted within a country imposing controls. currency devaluations result in a diminished value of funds denominated in the currency of the country instituting the devaluation.restrictive covenants in our debt agreements could limit our financial and operating flexibility.we maintain a number of credit facilities to support general corporate purposes (facilities) and have issued debt securities to manage liquidity and fund operations (debt securities). the agreements relating to a number of the facilities and the debt securities contain certain restrictive covenants applicable to us and certain of our subsidiaries, including cat financial. these covenants include maintaining a consolidated net worth (defined as the consolidated stockholders equity including preferred stock but excluding the pension and other post-retirement benefits balance within accumulated other comprehensive income (loss)) of not less than $9 billion, limitations on the incurrence of liens and certain restrictions on consolidation and merger. cat financial has also agreed under certain of these agreements to maintain a leverage ratio (consolidated debt to consolidated net worth, calculated (1)on a monthly basis as the average of the leverage ratios determined on the last day of each of the six preceding calendar months and (2)at each december31) not greater than 10.0 to 1, to maintain a minimum interest coverage ratio (profit excluding income taxes, interest expense and net gain/(loss) from interest rate derivatives to interest expense, calculated at the end of each calendar quarter for the rolling four quarter period then most recently ended) of not less than 1.15 to 1 and not to terminate, amend or modify its support agreement with us.a breach of one or more of the covenants could result in adverse consequences that could negatively impact our business, results of operations and financial condition. these consequences may include the acceleration of amounts outstanding under certain of the facilities, triggering of an obligation to redeem certain debt securities, termination of existing unused commitments by our lenders, refusal by our lenders to extend further credit under one or more of the facilities or to enter into new facilities or the lowering or modification of our credit ratings or those of one or more of our subsidiaries.16table of contentssustained increases in funding obligations under our pension plans may reduce our profitability.we maintain certain defined benefit pension plans for our employees, which impose on us certain funding obligations. in determining our future payment obligations under the plans, we assume certain rates of return on the plan assets and growth rates of certain costs. significant adverse changes in credit or capital markets could result in actual rates of return being materially lower than projected and increased pension expense in future years. we may be required to make contributions to our pension plans in the future, and these contributions could be material. our cost growth rates may also be materially higher than projected. these factors could significantly increase our payment obligations under the plans, and as a result, adversely affect our business, results of operations and financial condition.union disputes or other labor matters could adversely affect our operations and financial results.some of our employees are represented by labor unions in a number of countries under various collective bargaining agreements with varying durations and expiration dates. there can be no assurance that any current or future issues with our employees will be resolved or that we will not encounter future strikes, work stoppages or other types of conflicts with labor unions or our employees. we may not be able to satisfactorily renegotiate collective bargaining agreements in the united states and other countries when they expire. if we fail to renegotiate our existing collective bargaining agreements, we could encounter strikes or work stoppages or other types of conflicts with labor unions. in addition, existing collective bargaining agreements may not prevent a strike or work stoppage at our facilities in the future. we may also be subject to general country strikes or work stoppages unrelated to our business or collective bargaining agreements.  a work stoppage or other limitations on production at our facilities for any reason could have an adverse effect on our business, results of operations and financial condition.  in addition, many of our customers and suppliers have unionized work forces.  strikes or work stoppages experienced by our customers or suppliers could have an adverse effect on our business, results of operations and financial condition.costs associated with lawsuits or investigations or adverse rulings in enforcement or other legal proceedings may have an adverse effect on our results of operations.we are subject to a variety of legal proceedings and legal compliance risks in virtually every part of the world.  we face an inherent business risk of exposure to various types of claims, lawsuits and government investigations. we are involved in various intellectual property, product liability, product warranty and environmental claims and lawsuits and other legal proceedings that arise in and outside of the ordinary course of our business. the industries in which we operate are also periodically reviewed or investigated by regulators, which could lead to enforcement actions, fines and penalties or the assertion of private litigation claims. it is not possible to predict with certainty the outcome of claims, investigations and lawsuits, and we could in the future incur judgments, fines or penalties or enter into settlements of lawsuits and claims that could have an adverse effect on our business, results of operations and financial condition in any particular period.the global and diverse nature of our operations means that legal and compliance risks will continue to exist and additional legal proceedings and other contingencies, the outcome of which cannot be predicted with certainty, will arise from time to time.  in addition, subsequent developments in legal proceedings may affect our assessment and estimates of loss contingencies recorded as a reserve and require us to make payments in excess of our reserves, which could have an adverse effect on our results of operations.changes in accounting guidance could have an adverse effect on our results of operations, as reported in our financial statements.our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with gaap, which is periodically revised and/or expanded. accordingly, from time to time we are required to adopt new or revised accounting guidance and related interpretations issued by recognized authoritative bodies, including the financial accounting standards board and the sec. the impact of accounting pronouncements that have been issued but not yet implemented is disclosed in this annual report on form10-k and our quarterly reports on form10-q. an assessment of proposed standards is not provided, as such proposals are subject to change through the exposure process and, therefore, their effects on our financial statements cannot be meaningfully assessed. it is possible that future accounting guidance we are required to adopt could change the current accounting treatment that we apply to our consolidated financial statements and that such changes could have an adverse effect on our results of operations, as reported in our consolidated financial statements.17table of contentsincreased information technology security threats and more sophisticated computer crime pose a risk to our systems, networks, products and services.we rely upon information technology systems and networks, some of which are managed by third parties, in connection with a variety of business activities. additionally, we collect and store data that is sensitive to caterpillar. operating these information technology systems and networks and processing and maintaining this data, in a secure manner, are critical to our business operations and strategy. information technology security threats -- from user error to cybersecurity attacks designed to gain unauthorized access to our systems, networks and data -- are increasing in frequency and sophistication. cybersecurity attacks may range from random attempts to coordinated and targeted attacks, including sophisticated computer crime and advanced threats. these threats pose a risk to the security of our systems and networks and the confidentiality, availability and integrity of our data. we have experienced cybersecurity attacks that have resulted in unauthorized parties gaining access to our information technology systems and networks, and we could in the future experience similar attacks. however, to date, no cybersecurity attack has had a material impact on our financial condition, results of operations or liquidity. while we actively manage information technology security risks within our control, there can be no assurance that such actions will be sufficient to mitigate all potential risks to our systems, networks and data. the potential consequences of a material cybersecurity attack include reputational damage, litigation with third parties, diminution in the value of our investment in research, development and engineering, and increased cybersecurity protection and remediation costs, which in turn could adversely affect our competitiveness and results of operations.unexpected events, including natural disasters, may increase our cost of doing business or disrupt our operations.the occurrence of one or more unexpected events, including war, terrorist acts, fires, tornadoes, tsunamis, hurricanes, earthquakes, floods and other forms of severe weather in the united states or in other countries in which we operate or in which our suppliers are located could adversely affect our operations and financial performance. natural disasters, pandemic illness, equipment failures, power outages or other unexpected events could result in physical damage to and complete or partial closure of one or more of our manufacturing facilities or distribution centers, temporary or long-term disruption in the supply of component products from some local and international suppliers, disruption in the transport of our products to dealers and end-users and delay in the delivery of our products to our distribution centers. existing insurance arrangements may not provide protection for all of the costs that may arise from such events.item 1b.unresolved staff comments.none.18table of contentsitem 1c.executive officers of the registrant.namepresentcaterpillarinc.positionanddateofinitialelectionprincipalpositionsheldduringthepastfiveyearsifotherthancaterpillarinc.positioncurrentlyhelddouglas r. oberhelman (61)chairman and chief executive officer (2010)group president (2001-2010)bradley m. halverson (54)group president and chief financial officer (2013)corporate controller (2004-2010)                                    vice president (2010-2012)robert b. charter (51)*group president (2015) vice president (2009-2015)stuart l. levenick (62)**group president (2004)thomas a. pellette (52)*group president (2015)vice president (2010-2015) package and systems engineering division (2008-2010)edward j. rapp (57)group president (2007)group president and chief financial officer (2010 - 2012)d. james umpleby iii (56)group president (2013)solar turbines vice president (2007-2010)                    vice president (2010-2012)steven h. wunning (63)**group president (2004)james b. buda (67)executive vice president, law and public policy (2012)vice president, general counsel and secretary (2001- 2010)                                 vice president and chief legal officer            (2010 - 2011)                                                   senior vice president and chief legal officer (2011 - 2012)       david p. bozeman (46)senior vice president (2013)vice president (2009-2013)jananne a. copeland (52)chief accounting officer (2007)chief accounting officer and corporate controller (2010 - 2012)*effective january 1, 2015**retired effective february 1, 2015item 2.properties.general informationcaterpillars operations are highly integrated. although the majority of our plants are involved primarily in production relating to our construction industries, resource industries or energy & transportation segments, several plants are involved in manufacturing relating to more than one business segment. in addition, several plants reported in our financial statements under the all other segments are involved in the manufacturing of components that are used in the assembly of products for more than one business segment. caterpillars parts distribution centers are involved in the storage and distribution of parts for construction industries, resource industries and energy & transportation, and are included in the all other segments. the research and development activities carried on at our technical center in mossville, illinois involve products for construction industries, resource industries and energy & transportation.we believe the properties we own to be generally well maintained and adequate for present use. through planned capital expenditures, we expect these properties to remain adequate for future needs. properties we lease are covered by leases expiring over terms of generally one to ten years. we do not anticipate any difficulty in retaining occupancy of any leased facilities, either by renewing leases prior to expiration or by replacing them with equivalent leased facilities.headquarters and other key officesour corporate headquarters are in peoria, illinois. additional marketing and operating headquarters are located both inside and outside the united states including miami, florida; oak creek, wisconsin; san diego, california; geneva, switzerland; 19table of contentsbeijing, china; singapore, republic of singapore; piracicaba, brazil, and tokyo, japan. our financial products business is headquartered in leased offices located in nashville, tennessee.technical center, training centers, demonstration areas and proving groundswe operate a technical center located in mossville, illinois, and various other technical and training centers, demonstration areas and proving grounds located both inside and outside the united states.parts distribution centersdistribution of our parts is conducted from parts distribution centers inside and outside the united states and included in the all other segments in our financial statements. we operate parts distribution centers in the following locations: morton, illinois; arvin, california; denver, colorado; miami, florida; atlanta, georgia; st. paul, minnesota; clayton, ohio; york, pennsylvania; waco, texas; spokane, washington; melbourne, australia; grimbergen, belgium; piracicaba, brazil; shanghai, china; san luis potosi, mexico; singapore, republic of singapore; moscow, russia; johannesburg, south africa, and dubai, united arab emirates.  we also own or lease other facilities that support our distribution activities.remanufacturing and componentscomponent manufacturing and the remanufacturing of our products that is reported in the all other segments is conducted primarily at facilities in the following locations: toccoa, georgia; aurora, illinois; east peoria, illinois; peoria, illinois; franklin, indiana; danville, kentucky; menominee, michigan; corinth, mississippi; oxford, mississippi; prentiss county, mississippi; boonville, missouri; west plains, missouri; franklin, north carolina;  goldsboro, north carolina; morganton, north carolina; west fargo, north dakota; sumter, south carolina; piracicaba, brazil;  shanghai, china; tianjin, china; xuzhou, china; chaumont, france; bazzano, italy; castelvetro, italy; frosinone, italy; san eusebio, italy; nuevo laredo, mexico; ramos arizpe, mexico; radom, poland; singapore; pyongtaek, south korea; shrewsbury, united kingdom, and skinningrove, united kingdom. we also lease or own other facilities that support our remanufacturing and component manufacturing activities.manufacturingmanufacturing of products for our construction industries, resource industries and energy & transportation segments is conducted primarily at the locations listed below. these facilities are believed to be suitable for their intended purposes, with adequate capacities for current and projected needs for existing products. we have also announced investments to expand the capacity of a number of existing facilities and to build new facilities to support the companys growth.our principal manufacturing facilities include those used by the following segments in the following locations:20table of contentssegmentu.s.facilitiesfacilitiesoutsidetheu.s.construction industriesarkansas: north little rockbelgium:gosseliesillinois: aurora, decatur, east peoriabrazil:campo largo, piracicabanorth carolina:clayton, sanfordchina:suzhou, wujiang, xuzhou, qingzhoutexas:victoriafrance:grenoble, echirollesgeorgia:athenshungary:godolloindia:thiruvallarindonesia:jakartajapan:akashi, sagamiharapoland: janow sosnowiecrussia:tosno, novosibirskunited kingdom:desford, stocktonthailand:rayong resource industriesillinois: aurora, decatur, east peoria, jolietaustralia: beresfield, burnienorth carolina: winston-salembrazil:piracicabapennsylvania:houstonchina:tongzhou, wuxi, xuzhou, zhengzhoutennessee:dyersburgczech republic:ostravatexas:denisonfrance:arrasvirginia:hillsville, pulaskigermany:dortmund, lunenwest virginia:beckleyindia: hosur, thiruvallurwisconsin: south milwaukeeindonesia:jakartaitaly:jesijapan: sagamiharamexico:acuna, monterrey, reynosa, torreonrussia:tosnothailand:rayongunited kingdom:peterlee, wolverhamptonenergy & transportationalabama:albertville, montgomeryaustralia:reveseycalifornia: san diegobelgium:gosseliesgeorgia: griffinbrazil:curitiba, hortolandia, piracicaba, sete lagoasillinois: lagrange, mossville, mapleton, pontiacchina: tianjin, wuxiindiana:lafayette, muncieczech republic:zateckentucky:decoursey, louisville, mayfieldgermany:kiel, mannheim, rostocksouth carolina:greenville, newberryindia:hosur, aurangabadtexas: channelview, de soto, mabank, san antonio, schertz, seguin, shermanmexico:san luis potosi, tijuanarepublic of singapore:singaporesweden:ockero islandsswitzerland:riazzinounited kingdom:larne, monkstown, peterborough, sandiacre, shoreham, south queensferry, springvale, stafford, wimborne21table of contentsitem 3.legal proceedings.on january 8, 2015, the company received a grand jury subpoena from the u.s. district court for the central district of illinois.  the subpoena requests documents and information from the company relating to, among other things, financial information concerning u.s. and non-u.s. caterpillar subsidiaries (including undistributed profits of non-u.s. subsidiaries and the movement of cash among u.s. and non-u.s. subsidiaries).  the company is cooperating with this investigation.  the company is unable to predict the outcome or reasonably estimate any potential loss; however, we currently believe that this matter will not have a material adverse effect on the companys consolidated results of operations, financial position or liquidity.on september 12, 2014, the sec notified the company that it was conducting an informal investigation relating to caterpillar sarl and related structures.  the sec asked the company to preserve relevant documents and, on a voluntary basis, the company made a presentation to the staff of the sec on these topics.  the company is cooperating with the sec regarding this investigation.  the company is unable to predict the outcome or reasonably estimate any potential loss; however, we currently believe that this matter will not have a material adverse effect on the companys consolidated results of operations, financial position or liquidity.on september 10, 2014, the sec issued to caterpillar a subpoena seeking information concerning the companys accounting for the goodwill relating to its acquisition of bucyrus international, inc. in 2011 and related matters. the company is cooperating with the sec regarding this subpoena and its ongoing investigation.  the company is unable to predict the outcome or reasonably estimate any potential loss; however, we currently believe that this matter will not have a material adverse effect on the company's consolidated results of operations, financial position or liquidity.on march 20, 2014, brazils administrative council for economic defense (cade) published a technical opinion which named 18 companies and over 100 individuals as defendants, including two subsidiaries of caterpillar inc., mge - equipamentos e servios ferrovirios ltda. (mge) and caterpillar brasil ltda. the publication of the technical opinion opened cade's official administrative investigation into allegations that the defendants participated in anticompetitive bid activity for the construction and maintenance of metro and train networks in brazil. while companies cannot be held criminally liable for anticompetitive conduct in brazil, criminal charges have been brought against two current employees of mge and one former employee of mge involving the same conduct alleged by cade.  the company has responded to all requests for information from the authorities.  the company is unable to predict the outcome or reasonably estimate the potential loss; however, we currently believe that this matter will not have a material adverse effect on the company's consolidated results of operations, financial position or liquidity.on february 19, 2014, progress rail services corporation (progress rail), a wholly-owned subsidiary of caterpillar inc., received information from the california air resources board (carb) enforcement division indicating it was contemplating an enforcement proceeding with potential monetary sanctions in excess of $100,000 in connection with a notice of violation received by progress rail on march 15, 2013 alleging violations of air emissions regulations applicable to compression ignition mobile cargo handling equipment operating at california ports or intermodal rail yards.  despite uncertainty regarding the applicability of these regulations, progress rail, in coordination with carb, implemented certain corrective action measures.  on november 26, 2014, progress rail settled this matter with carb and paid a civil penalty of $390,733 to resolve the alleged violations.  on october 24, 2013, progress rail received a grand jury subpoena from the u.s. district court for the central district of california. the subpoena requests documents and information from progress rail, united industries corporation, a wholly-owned subsidiary of progress rail, and caterpillar inc. relating to allegations that progress rail conducted improper or unnecessary railcar inspections and repairs and improperly disposed of parts, equipment, tools and other items. in connection with this subpoena, progress rail was informed by the u.s. attorney for the central district of california that it is a target of a criminal investigation into potential violations of environmental laws and alleged improper business practices. the company is cooperating with the authorities and is currently in discussions regarding a potential resolution of the matter. although the company believes a loss is probable, we currently believe that this matter will not have a material adverse effect on the company's consolidated results of operations, financial position or liquidity. in addition, we are involved in other unresolved legal actions that arise in the normal course of business. the most prevalent of these unresolved actions involve disputes related to product design, manufacture and performance liability (including claimed asbestos and welding fumes exposure), contracts, employment issues, environmental matters or intellectual property rights. the aggregate range of reasonably possible losses in excess of accrued liabilities, if any, associated with these unresolved legal actions is not material. in some cases, we cannot reasonably estimate a range of loss because there is insufficient information regarding the matter. however, there is no more than a remote chance that any liability arising from these matters would be 22table of contentsmaterial. although it is not possible to predict with certainty the outcome of these unresolved legal actions, we believe that these actions will not individually or in the aggregate have a material adverse effect on our consolidated results of operations, financial position or liquidity.item 4.mine safety disclosures.information concerning mine safety violations or other regulatory matters required by section 1503(a) of the dodd-frank wall street reform and consumer protection act and item 104 of regulation s-k (17 cfr 229.104) is included in exhibit95 to this annual report.partiiitem 5.market for registrants common equity, related stockholder matters and issuer purchases of equity securities.information required by item 5 regarding our stock is incorporated by reference from the supplemental stockholder information section of exhibit13 under common stock (nyse:cat)  listing information,  price ranges,   number of stockholders and performance graph: total cumulative stockholder return for five-year period ending december31, 2014 and from the managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations section of exhibit13 under dividends paid per common share.sale of unregistered securitiesnon-u.s. employee stock purchase planswe have 28 employee stock purchase plans administered outside the united states for our non-u.s. employees. as of december 31, 2014, those plans had approximately 13,800 active participants in the aggregate. during the fourth quarter of 2014, approximately 313,000 shares of caterpillar common stock or foreign denominated equivalents were distributed under the plans. participants in some foreign plans have the option of receiving non-u.s. share certificates (foreign-denominated equivalents) in lieu of u.s. shares of caterpillar common stock upon withdrawal from the plan. these equivalent certificates are tradable only on the local stock market and are included in our determination of shares outstanding. distributions of caterpillar stock under the plans are exempt from registration under the securities act of 1933 pursuant to 17 cfr 230.903.issuer purchases of equity securitiesno shares were repurchased during the fourth quarter of 2014.other purchases of equity securitiesperiodtotalnumberofsharespurchased(1)averagepricepaidpersharetotalnumberofsharespurchasedundertheprogramapproximatedollarvalueofsharesthatmayyetbepurchasedundertheprogramoctober1-31, 20142,051$99.82n/an/anovember1-30, 20141,863100.10n/an/adecember1-31, 201430890.98n/an/atotal4,222$99.30_____________________________(1)represents shares delivered back to issuer for the payment of taxes resulting from the vesting of restricted stock units for employees and directors.item 6.selected financial data.information required by item 6 is incorporated by reference from the five-year financial summary and managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations of exhibit13.23table of contentsitem 7.managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations.information required by item 7 is incorporated by reference from managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations of exhibit13.this managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our discussion of cautionary statements and significant risks to the companys business under item 1a. risk factors of this form10-k.item 7a.quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk.information required by item 7a appears in note 1  operations and summary of significant accounting policies, note 3  derivative financial instruments and risk management, note 18  fair value disclosures and note 19  concentration of credit risk of exhibit13. other information required by item 7a is incorporated by reference from managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations of exhibit13.item 8.financial statements and supplementary data.information required by item 8 is incorporated by reference from the report of independent registered public accounting firm and from the financial statements and notes to consolidated financial statements of exhibit13. other information required by item 8 is included in computation of ratios of earnings to fixed charges filed as exhibit12 to this form10-k.item 9.changes in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and financial disclosure.not applicable.item 9a.controls and procedures.disclosure controls and proceduresan evaluation was performed under the supervision and with the participation of the company's management, including the chief executive officer (ceo) and chief financial officer (cfo), of the effectiveness of the design and operation of the company's  disclosure controls and procedures, as that term is defined in rule13a-15(e) under the exchange act, as of the end of the period covered by this annual report. based on that evaluation, the ceo and cfo concluded that the company's disclosure controls and procedures are effective as of the end of the period covered by this annual report.managements report on internal control over financial reportingthe management of caterpillar inc. (company) is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over financial reporting as such term is defined in rule 13a-15(f) under the exchange act. our internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of our financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. our internal control over financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that (i) pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company; (ii) provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the company are being made only in accordance with authorizations of management and directors of the company; and (iii) provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the companys assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements.because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. also, projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.management assessed the effectiveness of the companys internal control over financial reporting as of december31, 2014. in making this assessment, we used the criteria set forth by the committee of sponsoring organizations of the treadway commission (coso) in internal controlintegrated framework (2013). based on our assessment we concluded that, as of december31, 2014, the companys internal control over financial reporting was effective based on those criteria.24table of contentsthe effectiveness of the companys internal control over financial reporting as of december31, 2014 has been audited by pricewaterhousecoopers llp, an independent registered public accounting firm. their report appears on page a-4 of exhibit13.changes in internal control over financial reportingduring the last fiscal quarter, there has been no significant change in the companys internal control over financial reporting that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to materially affect, the companys internal control over financial reporting.item 9b.other information.not applicable.partiiiitem 10.directors, executive officers and corporate governance.identification of directors and business experienceinformation required by this item is incorporated by reference from the 2015 proxy statement.identification of executive officers and business experienceinformation required by this item appears in item 1c of this form10-k.family relationshipsthere are no family relationships between the officers and directors of the company.legal proceedings involving officers and directorsinformation required by this item is incorporated by reference from the 2015 proxy statement.audit committee financial expertinformation required by this item is incorporated by reference from the 2015 proxy statement.identification of audit committeeinformation required by this item is incorporated by reference from the 2015 proxy statement.stockholder recommendation of board nomineesinformation required by this item is incorporated by reference from the 2015 proxy statement.compliance with section16(a)of the exchange actinformation required by this item relating to compliance with section16(a)of the exchange act is incorporated by reference from the 2015 proxy statement.code of ethicsour worldwide code of conduct (code), first published in 1974 and most recently updated in 2015, sets a high standard for honesty and ethical behavior by every employee, including the principal executive officer, principal financial officer, controller and principal accounting officer. the code is posted on our website at www.caterpillar.com/code and is exhibit 14 to this form 10-k. to obtain a copy of the code at no charge, submit a written request to the corporate secretary at 100 ne adams street, peoria, il 61629-6490.  we post on our website any required amendments to or waivers granted under our code pursuant to sec or new york stock exchange disclosure rules.25table of contentsitem 11.executive compensation.information required by this item is incorporated by reference from the 2015 proxy statement.item 12.security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management and related stockholder matters.information required by this item relating to security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management is incorporated by reference from the 2015 proxy statement.information required by this item relating to securities authorized for issuance under equity compensation plans is included in the following table:equity compensation plan information(as of december31, 2014)plancategory(a)number of securities to be issued up on exercise of outstanding options, warrants and rights(b)weighted-averageexerciseprice of outstanding options, warrants and rights(c)number of securities remaining available for future issuance under equity compensation plans (excluding securities reflected in column (a))equity compensation plans approved by security holders39,247,242$74.480038,704,644equity compensation plans not approved by security holdersn/an/an/atotal39,247,242$74.480038,704,644item 13.certain relationships and related transactions, and director independence.information required by this item is incorporated by reference from the 2015 proxy statement.item 14.principal accountant fees and services.information required by this item is incorporated by reference from the 2015 proxy statement.partivitem 15. exhibits and financial statement schedules.(a)the following documents are incorporated by reference from exhibit13:1.financial statements:management's report on internal control over financial reportingreport of independent registered public accounting firmstatement 1 - consolidated results of operationsstatement 2 -  consolidated comprehensive incomestatement 3 - consolidated financial positionstatement 4 - changes in consolidated stockholders equitystatement 5 - consolidated statement of cash flownotes to consolidated financial statements2.financial statement schedules:all schedules are omitted because the required information is shown in the financial statements or the notes thereto incorporated by reference from exhibit13 or considered to be immaterial.26table of contents(b)exhibits:3.1restated certificate of incorporation, effective june 13, 2012 (incorporated by reference from exhibit3.1 to the form10-q filed for the quarter ended june30, 2012).3.2bylaws amended and restated as of december 11, 2013 (incorporated by reference from exhibit3.1 to form8-k filed december 11, 2013).4.1indenture dated as of may1, 1987, between caterpillar inc. and the first national bank of chicago, as trustee (incorporated by reference from exhibit4.1 to forms-3 (registration no.333-22041) filed february19, 1997).4.2first supplemental indenture, dated as of june1, 1989, between caterpillar inc. and the first national bank of chicago, as trustee (incorporated by reference from exhibit4.2 to forms-3 (registration no.333-22041) filed february19, 1997).4.3appointment of citibank, n.a. as successor trustee, dated october1, 1991, under the indenture, as supplemented, dated as of may1, 1987 (incorporated by reference from exhibit4.3 to forms-3 (registration no.333-22041) filed february19, 1997).4.4second supplemental indenture, dated as of may15, 1992, between caterpillar inc. and citibank, n.a., as successor trustee (incorporated by reference from exhibit4.4 to forms-3 (registration no.333-22041) filed february19, 1997).4.5third supplemental indenture, dated as of december16, 1996, between caterpillar inc. and citibank, n.a., as successor trustee (incorporated by reference from exhibit4.5 to forms-3 (registration no.333-22041) filed february19, 1997).4.6tri-party agreement, dated as of november2, 2006, between caterpillar inc., citibank, n.a. and u.s. bank national association appointing u.s. bank as successor trustee under the indenture dated as of may1, 1987, as amended and supplemented (incorporated by reference from exhibit4.6 to the 2006 form10-k).4.7formof 0.950% senior note due 2015 (incorporated by reference from exhibit4.1 to form8-k filed june 21, 2012).4.8formof 1.500% senior note due 2017 (incorporated by reference from exhibit4.2 to form8-k filed june 21, 2012).4.9formof 2.600% senior note due 2022 (incorporated by reference from exhibit4.3 to form8-k filed june 21, 2012).4.10form of 3.803% rule 144a global debenture due 2042 (incorporated by reference from exhibit 4.1 to form 8-k filed august 28, 2012).4.11form of 3.803% regulation s global debenture due 2042 (incorporated by reference from exhibit 4.2 to form 8-k filed august 28, 2012).4.12form of 3.803% global debenture due 2042 (incorporated by reference from exhibit 4.9 to form s-4 filed on september 7, 2012).4.13form of 3.40% senior note due 2024 (incorporated by reference from exhibit 4.1 to form 8-k filed on may 8, 2014).4.14form of 4.30% senior note due 2044 (incorporated by reference from exhibit 4.2 to form 8-k filed on may 8, 2014).4.15form of 4.75% senior note due 2064 (incorporated by reference from exhibit 4.3 to form 8-k filed on may 8, 2014).10.1caterpillar inc. 1996 stock option and long-term incentive plan amended and restated through fourth amendment dated december19, 2008 (incorporated by reference from exhibit10.1 to the 2008 form10-k).*10.2caterpillar inc. 2006 long-term incentive plan as amended and restated through second amendment dated august 22, 2013 (incorporated by reference from exhibit10.6 to form10-q for the quarter ended september 30, 2013).*10.3caterpillar inc. 2014 long-term incentive plan (incorporated by reference from exhibit 10.1 to form 8-k filed june 12, 2014). *10.4caterpillar inc. executive short term incentive plan (incorporated by reference from exhibit 10.2 to form 8-k filed june 12, 2014). *27table of contents10.5terms applicable to awards of restricted stock units under chairmans award program pursuant to the 2006 long-term incentive plan, as of march 5, 2012 (incorporated by reference from exhibit 10.3 to the 2012 form 10-k)*10.6terms applicable to awards of stock appreciation rights pursuant to the 2006 long-term incentive plan, as of march 5, 2012 (incorporated by reference from exhibit 10.4 to the 2012 form 10-k).*10.7terms applicable to awards of nonqualified stock options pursuant to the 2006 long-term incentive plan, as of march 5, 2012 (incorporated by reference from exhibit 10.5 to the 2012 form 10-k).*10.8terms applicable to awards of restricted stock units pursuant to the 2014 long-term incentive plan.*10.9terms applicable to awards of nonqualified stock options pursuant to the 2014 long-term incentive plan.*10.10terms applicable to awards of performance-based restricted stock units pursuant to the 2014 long-term incentive plan.*10.11terms applicable to awards of restricted stock units for directors pursuant to the 2014 long-term incentive plan.*10.12caterpillar inc. supplemental retirement plan (formerly known as the caterpillar inc. supplemental pension benefit plan), as amended and restated through fifth amendment dated december 10, 2014.*10.13caterpillar inc. supplemental employees investment plan, as amended and restated through fifth amendment dated december 10, 2014.*10.14caterpillar inc. executive short-term incentive plan, as amended and restated effective as of january1, 2011 by a document dated december13, 2010 (incorporated by reference to appendix a to the companys definitive proxy statement on formdef 14a filed on april15, 2011).*10.15caterpillar inc. directors deferred compensation plan, as amended and restated effective as of january1, 2005 by a document dated february25, 2008 (incorporated by reference from exhibit10.6 to the 2006 form10-k).*10.16caterpillar inc. directors charitable award program, as amended and restated effective as of april1, 2008 by a document dated march31, 2008 (incorporated by reference from exhibit10.7 to the 2008 form10-k).*10.17caterpillar inc. deferred employees investment plan, as amended and restated through fifth amendment dated december 10, 2014.*10.18caterpillar inc. supplemental deferred compensation plan as amended and restated through fourth amendment dated december 10, 2014.*10.19solar turbines incorporated managerial retirement objective plan, as amended and restated through first amendment as of december 10, 2014.*10.20solar turbines incorporated pension plan for european foreign service employees, as amended and restated through fourth amendment dated december 10, 2014.*10.21time share agreement dated may6, 2011 (incorporated by reference from exhibit10.3 to form10-q for the quarter ended march31, 2011).*10.22equity compensation and supplemental pension agreement, dated november 2, 2012, between caterpillar inc. and richard p. lavin (incorporated by reference from exhibit 10.1 to form 8-k filed november 6, 2012).*10.23equity compensation agreement, dated december 15, 2014, between caterpillar inc. and stuart l. levenick (incorporated by reference from exhibit 10.1 to form 8-k filed december 18, 2014).*10.24equity compensation agreement, dated december 15, 2014, between caterpillar inc. and steven h. wunning (incorporated by reference from exhibit 10.2 to form 8-k filed december 18, 2014).*10.25credit agreement (five-year facility) dated as of september15, 2011 among caterpillarinc., caterpillar financial services corporation, caterpillar international finance limited, caterpillar finance corporation, certain financial institutions named therein, citibank, n.a., as agent, citibank international plc, as local currency agent, and the bank of tokyo-mitsubishi ufj,ltd., as japan local currency agent (incorporated by reference from exhibit99.4 to form8-k filed september16, 2011).10.26local currency addendum to the five-year facility dated as of september15, 2011 (incorporated by reference from exhibit99.5 to form8-k filed september16, 2011).10.27japan local currency addendum to the five-year facility dated as of september15, 2011 (incorporated by reference from exhibit99.6 to form8-k filed september16, 2011).28table of contents10.28amendment no. 1 to the five-year facility, dated as of september 13, 2012 (incorporated by reference from exhibit99.5 to the company's current report on form8-k filed september17, 2012).10.29omnibus amendment no. 2 and amendment no. 1 to the local currency addendum to the 2011 five-year credit agreement (incorporated by reference from exhibit 99.5 to form 8-k filed september 17, 2013).10.30omnibus amendment no. 3 and amendment no. 2 to the local currency addendum to the 2011 five-year credit agreement (incorporated by reference from exhibit 99.5 to form 8-k filed september 16, 2014).10.31credit agreement (four-year facility), dated as of september 16, 2010, by and among the company, cat financial, caterpillar international finance limited and caterpillar finance corporation, the banks named therein, local currency banks and japan local currency banks party thereto, citibank, n.a., as agent, citibank international plc, as local currency agent, and the bank of tokyo-mitsubishi ufj, ltd., as japan local currency agent (incorporated by reference from exhibit 99.4 to form 8-k filed september 21, 2010)10.32local currency addendum to the four-year facility (incorporated by reference from exhibit99.5 to form8-k filed september21, 2010).10.33japan local currency addendum to the four-year facility (incorporated by reference from exhibit99.6 to form8-k filed september21, 2010).10.34amendment no.1 to the four-year facility, dated as of september15, 2011 (incorporated by reference from exhibit99.7 to form8-k filed september16, 2011)10.35amendment no. 2 to the four-year facility, dated as of september 13, 2012 (incorporated by reference from exhibit 99.4 to form 8-k filed september 17, 2012). 10.36omnibus amendment no. 3 and amendment no. 1 to the local currency addendum to the 2010 four-year credit agreement (incorporated by reference from exhibit 99.4 to form 8-k filed september 17, 2013).10.37omnibus amendment no. 4 and amendment no. 2 to the local currency addendum to the 2010 four-year credit agreement (incorporated by reference from exhibit 99.4 to form 8-k filed september 16, 2014).10.38credit agreement (2014 364-day credit agreement), dated as of september 11, 2014, among the company, cat financial, caterpillar international finance limited and caterpillar finance corporation, certain financial institutions named therein, citibank, n.a., as agent, citibank international plc, as local currency agent, and the bank of tokyo-mitsubishi ufj, ltd., as japan local currency agent (incorporated by reference from exhibit 99.1 to form 8-k filed september 16, 2014).10.39local currency addendum, dated as of september 11, 2014, to the 2014 364-day credit agreement  (incorporated by reference from exhibit99.2 to form8-k filed september16, 2014).10.40japan local currency addendum, dated as of september 11, 2014, to the 2014 364-day credit agreement (incorporated by reference from exhibit99.3 to form8-k filed september16, 2014).11computations of earnings per share.12computation of ratios of earnings to fixed charges.13general and financial information for 2014 containing the information required by sec rule14a-3 for an annual report to security holders.14caterpillar worldwide code of conduct.21subsidiaries and affiliates of the registrant.23consent of independent registered public accounting firm.31.1certification of douglas r. oberhelman, chairman and chief executive officer of caterpillar inc., pursuant to section302 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002.31.2certification of bradley m. halverson, group president and chief financial officer of caterpillar inc., pursuant to section302 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002.32certification of douglas r. oberhelman, chairman and chief executive officer of caterpillar inc. and bradley m. halverson, group president and chief financial officer of caterpillar inc., pursuant to section906 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002.95mine safety disclosures.101.insxbrl instance document.101.schxbrl taxonomy extension schema document.29table of contents101.calxbrl taxonomy extension calculation linkbase document.101.defxbrl taxonomy extension definition linkbase document.101.labxbrl taxonomy extension label linkbase document.101.prexbrl taxonomy extension presentation linkbase document.__________________________________________*management contracts and compensatory plans and arrangements required to be filed as exhibits pursuant to item 15(b)of this report.30table of contentsform10-ksignaturespursuant to the requirements of section13 or 15(d)of the securities exchange act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.caterpillar inc.(registrant)february17, 2015by:/s/james b. budajames b. buda, executive vice president, law and public policypursuant to the requirements of the securities exchange act of 1934, this report has been signed below by the following persons on behalf of the registrant and in the capacities and on the dates indicated.chairman of the boardand chief executive officerfebruary17, 2015/s/douglas r. oberhelman(douglas r. oberhelman)group president andfebruary17, 2015/s/bradley m. halversonchief financial officer(bradley m. halverson)chief accounting officerfebruary17, 2015/s/jananne a. copeland(jananne a. copeland)february17, 2015/s/david l. calhoundirector(david l. calhoun)31table of contentsfebruary17, 2015/s/daniel m. dickinsondirector(daniel m. dickinson)february17, 2015/s/juan gallardodirector(juan gallardo)february17, 2015/s/jesse j. greene, jr. director(jesse j. greene,jr.)february17, 2015/s/jon m. huntsman, jr. director(jon m. huntsman, jr.)february17, 2015/s/dennis a. muilenburgdirector(dennis a. muilenburg)february17, 2015/s/william a. osborndirector(william a. osborn)february17, 2015/s/edward b. rust, jr. director(edward b. rust,jr.)february17, 2015/s/susan c. schwabdirector(susan c. schwab)february17, 2015/s/miles d. whitedirector(miles d. white)32table of contentsform10-kexhibitindex3.1restated certificate of incorporation, effective june 13, 2012 (incorporated by reference from exhibit3.1 to the form10-q filed for the quarter ended june30, 2012).3.2bylaws amended and restated as of december 11, 2013 (incorporated by reference from exhibit3.1 to form 8-k filed december 11, 2013).4.1indenture dated as of may1, 1987, between caterpillar inc. and the first national bank of chicago, as trustee (incorporated by reference from exhibit4.1 to forms-3 (registration no.333-22041) filed february19, 1997).4.2first supplemental indenture, dated as of june1, 1989, between caterpillar inc. and the first national bank of chicago, as trustee (incorporated by reference from exhibit4.2 to forms-3 (registration no.333-22041) filed february19, 1997).4.3appointment of citibank, n.a. as successor trustee, dated october1, 1991, under the indenture, as supplemented, dated as of may1, 1987 (incorporated by reference from exhibit4.3 to forms-3 (registration no.333-22041) filed february19, 1997).4.4second supplemental indenture, dated as of may15, 1992, between caterpillar inc. and citibank, n.a., as successor trustee (incorporated by reference from exhibit4.4 to forms-3 (registration no.333-22041) filed february19, 1997).4.5third supplemental indenture, dated as of december16, 1996, between caterpillar inc. and citibank, n.a., as successor trustee (incorporated by reference from exhibit4.5 to forms-3 (registration no.333-22041) filed february19, 1997).4.6tri-party agreement, dated as of november2, 2006, between caterpillar inc., citibank, n.a. and u.s. bank national association appointing u.s. bank as successor trustee under the indenture dated as of may1, 1987, as amended and supplemented (incorporated by reference from exhibit4.6 to the 2006 form10-k).4.7formof 0.950% senior note due 2015 (incorporated by reference from exhibit4.1 to form8-k filed june 21, 2012).4.8formof 1.500% senior note due 2017 (incorporated by reference from exhibit4.2 to form8-k filed june 21, 2012).4.9formof 2.600% senior note due 2022 (incorporated by reference from exhibit4.3 to form8-k filed june 21, 2012).4.10form of 3.803% rule 144a global debenture due 2042 (incorporated by reference from exhibit 4.1 to form 8-k filed august 28, 2012).4.11form of 3.803% regulation s global debenture due 2042 (incorporated by reference from exhibit 4.2 to form 8-k filed august 28, 2012).4.12form of 3.803% global debenture due 2042 (incorporated by reference from exhibit 4.9 to form s-4 filed on september 7, 2012).4.13form of 3.40% senior note due 2024 (incorporated by reference from exhibit 4.1 to form 8-k filed on may 8, 2014).4.14form of 4.30% senior note due 2044 (incorporated by reference from exhibit 4.2 to form 8-k filed on may 8, 2014).4.15form of 4.75% senior note due 2064 (incorporated by reference from exhibit 4.3 to form 8-k filed on may 8, 2014).10.1caterpillar inc. 1996 stock option and long-term incentive plan amended and restated through fourth amendment dated december19, 2008 (incorporated by reference from exhibit10.1 to the 2008 form10-k).*10.2caterpillar inc. 2006 long-term incentive plan as amended and restated through second amendment dated august 22, 2013 (incorporated by reference from exhibit10.6 to form10-q for the quarter ended september 30, 2013).*10.3caterpillar inc. 2014 long-term incentive plan (incorporated by reference from exhibit 10.1 to form 8-k filed june 12, 2014). *10.4caterpillar inc. executive short term incentive plan (incorporated by reference from exhibit 10.2 to form 8-k filed june 12, 2014). *33table of contents10.5terms applicable to awards of restricted stock units under chairmans award program pursuant to the 2006 long-term incentive plan, as of march 5, 2012 (incorporated by reference from exhibit 10.3 to the 2012 form 10-k).*10.6terms applicable to awards of stock appreciation rights pursuant to the 2006 long-term incentive plan, as of march 5, 2012 (incorporated by reference from exhibit 10.4 to the 2012 form 10-k).*10.7terms applicable to awards of nonqualified stock options pursuant to the 2006 long-term incentive plan, as of march 5, 2012 (incorporated by reference from exhibit 10. 5 to the 2012 form 10-k).*10.8terms applicable to awards of restricted stock units pursuant to the 2014 long-term incentive plan.*10.9terms applicable to awards of nonqualified stock options pursuant to the 2014 long-term incentive plan.*10.10terms applicable to awards of performance-based restricted stock units pursuant to the 2014 long-term incentive plan.*10.11terms applicable to awards of restricted stock units for directors pursuant to the 2014 long-term incentive plan.*10.12caterpillar inc. supplemental retirement plan (formerly known as the caterpillar inc. supplemental pension benefit plan), as amended and restated through fifth amendment dated december 10, 2014.*10.13caterpillar inc. supplemental employees investment plan, as amended and restated through fifth amendment dated december 10, 2014.*10.14caterpillar inc. executive short-term incentive plan, as amended and restated effective as of january 1, 2011 by a document dated december 13, 2010 (incorporated by reference to appendix a to the company's definitive proxy statement on form def 14a filed on april 15, 2011).*10.15caterpillar inc. directors deferred compensation plan, as amended and restated effective as of january1, 2005 by a document dated february25, 2008 (incorporated by reference from exhibit10.6 to the 2006 form10-k).*10.16caterpillar inc. directors charitable award program, as amended and restated effective as of april1, 2008 by a document dated march31, 2008 (incorporated by reference from exhibit10.7 to the 2008 form10-k).*10.17caterpillar inc. deferred employees investment plan, as amended and restated through fifth amendment dated december 10, 2014.*10.18caterpillar inc. supplemental deferred compensation plan as amended and restated through fourth amendment dated december 10, 2014.*10.19solar turbines incorporated managerial retirement objective plan as amended and restated through first amendment as of december 10, 2014.*10.20solar turbines incorporated pension plan for european foreign service employees, as amended and restated through fourth amendment dated december 10, 2014.*10.21time share agreement dated may6, 2011 (incorporated by reference from exhibit10.3 to form10-q for the quarter ended march31, 2011).*10.22equity compensation and supplemental pension agreement, dated november 2, 2012, between caterpillar inc. and richard p. lavin (incorporated by reference from exhibit 10.1 to form 8-k filed november 6, 2012).*10.23equity compensation agreement, dated december 15, 2014, between caterpillar inc. and stuart l. levenick (incorporated by reference from exhibit 10.1 to form 8-k filed december 18, 2014).*10.24equity compensation agreement, dated december 15, 2014, between caterpillar inc. and steven h. wunning (incorporated by reference from exhibit 10.2 to form 8-k filed december 18, 2014).*10.25credit agreement (five-year facility) dated as of september15, 2011 among caterpillarinc., caterpillar financial services corporation, caterpillar international finance limited, caterpillar finance corporation, certain financial institutions named therein, citibank, n.a., as agent, citibank international plc, as local currency agent, and the bank of tokyo-mitsubishi ufj,ltd., as japan local currency agent (incorporated by reference from exhibit99.4 to form8-k filed september16, 2011).10.26local currency addendum to the five-year facility dated as of september15, 2011 (incorporated by reference from exhibit99.5 to form8-k filed september16, 2011).10.27japan local currency addendum to the five-year facility dated as of september15, 2011 (incorporated by reference from exhibit99.6 to form8-k filed september16, 2011).10.28amendment no. 1 to the five-year facility, dated as of september 13, 2012 (incorporated by reference from exhibit99.5 to the company's current report on form8-k filed september17, 2012).34table of contents10.29omnibus amendment no. 2 and amendment no. 1 to the local currency addendum to the 2011 five-year credit agreement (incorporated by reference from exhibit 99.5 to form 8-k filed september 17, 2013).10.30omnibus amendment no. 3 and amendment no. 2 to the local currency addendum to the 2011 five-year credit agreement (incorporated by reference from exhibit 99.5 to form 8-k filed september 16, 2014).10.31credit agreement (four-year facility), dated as of september 16, 2010, by and among the company, cat financial, caterpillar international finance limited and caterpillar finance corporation, the banks named therein, local currency banks and japan local currency banks party thereto, citibank, n.a., as agent, citibank international plc, as local currency agent, and the bank of tokyo-mitsubishi ufj, ltd., as japan local currency agent (incorporated by reference from exhibit 99.4 to form 8-k filed september 21, 2010).  10.32local currency addendum to the four-year facility (incorporated by reference from exhibit99.5 to form8-k filed september21, 2010).10.33japan local currency addendum to the four-year facility (incorporated by reference from exhibit99.6 to form8-k filed september21, 2010).10.34amendment no.1 to the four-year facility, dated as of september15, 2011 (incorporated by reference from exhibit99.7 to form8-k filed september16, 2011).10.35amendment no. 2 to the four-year facility, dated as of september 13, 2012 (incorporated by reference from exhibit 99.4 to form 8-k filed september 17, 2012). 10.36omnibus amendment no. 3 and amendment no. 1 to the local currency addendum to the 2010 four-year credit agreement (incorporated by reference from exhibit 99.4 to form 8-k filed september 17, 2013).10.37omnibus amendment no. 4 and amendment no. 2 to the local currency addendum to the 2010 four-year credit agreement (incorporated by reference from exhibit 99.4 to form 8-k filed september 16, 2014).10.38credit agreement (2014 364-day credit agreement), dated as of september 11, 2014, among the company, cat financial, caterpillar international finance limited and caterpillar finance corporation, certain financial institutions named therein, citibank, n.a., as agent, citibank international plc, as local currency agent, and the bank of tokyo-mitsubishi ufj, ltd., as japan local currency agent (incorporated by reference from exhibit 99.1 to form 8-k filed september 16, 2014).10.39local currency addendum, dated as of september 11, 2014, to the 2014 364-day credit agreement  (incorporated by reference from exhibit99.2 to form8-k filed september16, 2014).10.40japan local currency addendum, dated as of september 11, 2014, to the 2014 364-day credit agreement (incorporated by reference from exhibit99.3 to form8-k filed september16, 2014).11computations of earnings per share.12computation of ratios of earnings to fixed charges.13general and financial information for 2014 containing the information required by sec rule14a-3 for an annual report to security holders.14caterpillar worldwide code of conduct.21subsidiaries and affiliates of the registrant.23consent of independent registered public accounting firm.31.1certification of douglas r. oberhelman, chairman and chief executive officer of caterpillar inc., pursuant to section302 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002.31.2certification of bradley m. halverson, group president and chief financial officer of caterpillar inc., pursuant to section302 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002.32certification of douglas r. oberhelman, chairman and chief executive officer of caterpillar inc. and bradley m. halverson, group president and chief financial officer of caterpillar inc., pursuant to section906 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002.95mine safety disclosures.101.insxbrl instance document.101.schxbrl taxonomy extension schema document.101.calxbrl taxonomy extension calculation linkbase document.101.defxbrl taxonomy extension definition linkbase document.101.labxbrl taxonomy extension label linkbase document.35table of contents101.prexbrl taxonomy extension presentation linkbase document.__________________________________________*management contracts and compensatory plans and arrangements required to be filed as exhibits pursuant to item 15(b)of this report.36
